REVIVAL 0F RELIGIOUS LEARNINGS
IMAM GHAZZALI'S
IHYA ULUM-ID-DIN
Translated by
FAZL-UL-KARIM
YOL. I
Published by
DARUL-ISHAAT
Urdu Bazar, Karachi
Pakistan
- Phone
: 213768
v

j Rlghts of composing reseryed
,
Publisher
DARUL-ISHAAT
URDU BAZAR KARACHI-PAKISTAN
Tel
: 213768 - 2631861
Flrst Edidon
: 1993
Composing at
KODWAYI COMPOSING CENTRE
Pakistan Chowk, Karachi.
PISTRIBUTORS:
Bait-ul-Quran Urdu Bazar Karachi-1
Idara Tul Ma'arif, Darul Uloom Korangi Karachi-14
Maktaba Darul Uloon Darul Uloom Korangi Karachi-14
Idara Tal Quran 437/D, G.E. Lasbella Karachi-5
Idara-e-Islamiat 190 Anar Kali Lahore.
also available at:-
Siddigui Trust Al-Mamar Apartments
Lasbella Karachi-5
Printed At
ahmad printing corporation karachi.
Vol-I
KNOWLEDGE
3
About the Book
The book is the English version of Imam Ghazzali's Ihya
Ulum-ud-Din. It deals with worship and divine service.
Imam Abu-Hamid al-Ghazzali
is unquestionabIy the
greatest theologian of Islam and one of
its noblest and most
original thinkers. He was born in 1058 A.D.at Tu s, wherohe died
in
1111. He reproduced in his religious experiencej
all the
spiritual phases developed by Islam.
Starting
his relgious
life as orthodox, Al-Ghazzali soon
turned Suti, and when still under twenty he had broken with all
the past. In 1091 he was appointed lecturer at the Nizamiyah in
Baghdad, where he became a sceptic. Four year later he returned
to Sufism after a terrific spiritual struggle that left him a physical
wreck. Intellectualism had failed him. As a dervish he roamed
from place to place enjoying peace of soul and acquiescence of
mind. After about twelve years of retirement in various places,
including two years of retreat in Syria and a holy pilgrimage, he
returned to Baghdad to preach and teach. There he composed his
masterpiece lyha Ulum-id-Din (the revivification of the sciences
of religion).
The mysticism of this work vitalized the Iaw its orthodoxy
Ieavened the doctrine of Islam. In it and such other works of his
as
Fatihat-al-Ulum, Tahafut of Falasifah f Iqtisad fi-al-Itiqadf
orthodox speculation reached its culminating point.

THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
CONTENTS
Preface
Preface ofImam Gazzal i
CHAPTER I
Acquisition ofKnowledge
Excellence of Leaming
Praiseworthy and blameworthy learnines
rourlmams
Meanings of some words now changed
Manners to be observed by teachers and students
Signs of the learned of the Hereafter
Intellect and its noble nature
CHAPTER II
Foundation of Belief
Proof of belief
Attributes and actions ofGod
Rules of articles of belief
CHAPTER III
Mysteries of Cleanliness
Purification from impurites
Puritication ofbody and mind
Clieansing the extemal Bodily growths
CHAPTERIV
Secrets of prayer
Stories of prayer ofGod fearing men
Meri ts of Jumma Prayer
Optional prayers
CHAPTER V
Secrets ofZakat and charities
Some subtle rules of Zakat
Merits of optional Charity
CHAPTER VI
Secrets of Pasting
Optional fasts and its rules
CHAPTERVII
Secrets of Pilgrimage
Ten secret things of Haj
CHAPTER VIII
Excellence of the Quran
External and internal rules of reciting
Individual Interpretation
J
CHAPTER IX
Zikr and Invocations
Rules of invocations
Invocations of sages
CHAPTERX
Actions after division ofTimes
Merits of Night Prayer
7
13
18
24
29
38
45
54
62
92
99
103
109
119
122
124
126
130
133
147
151
155
163
166
176
180
186
188
200
209
212
224
229
239
247
249
259

THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
PREFACE
Through the unbounded grace of the Almighty God and
blessings of the greatest Apostle of God, the English version of
the Book of worship of the world renowned Ihyaul Ulum
(Revival of religious learning) of Imam Ghazzali, the greatest
thinker of the world of Islam, the Proof of Islam, the famous Sufi
and devout, has now been published in full. This book Ihya is a
sea of knowledge full of reasons and arguments, full of Quranic
verses, traditions of the Holy Prophet and of the companions and
the famous saints of early ages. Each subject was supported by
the Quran, traditions and sayings of the learned sages and wise
men and established by reasons and arguments.
As the great Imambelonged originally to the Shafeyi Sunni
sect, some of the religious doctrines will be found in line with
that sect, but nevertheless its importance is very great. In his
advanced age, the Imam was not a blind follower of sects but
(ollowed his independent thinking and as such indirectly
created a sect of his own. As the world is advancing with ever
new ideas and scientific discoveries, so also this work is full of
novel and great ideas and scientific discoveries and thereby
the Imam revived truly the religious sciences and gave them
an impetus never given by his predecessors in such a manner.
He saved Islam from the currents and cross currents of
devilish thoughts and pagan ideas that inperceptibly entered
into
Islam
and
clearly showed
their
fallacies
and
misconceptions. For
this reason, he was given the
title of
Hujjatul Islam or the Proof of Islam. His thoughts pr'evailed
upon those savants who came after him. Had not the Almighty
blessed him with the necklace of reason and intellect, the true
belief of Islam would have been carried away by the strong
current of irreligious and misguided thoughts.
True it is that there are many weak traditions in this book, but
at the same time it should be remembered that the authors of six
authentic traditional books specially Bukhari and Muslim
selected some few thousand traditions as most of them were not
proved to have been founded by trustworthy narrators from the
Holy Prophet down to the narrator or did not meet with all the
rules laid down for an authentic tradition. For want of proof.

8
REVIVAL OF RELIGIOUS LEARNINGS
VoI-I
many guilly persons are acquitted. For that, i t cannot be said that
all acquitted persons are innocent. So in this perspecHye
the
tradihons in the Ihya should be regarded. Had Imam Ghazzali
themth?sbo
e
oT.
trU5W°rthy' he W°U,d n°‘ have incorporated
The present translation is an attempt to bring out a complete
translation of Ihya in English in four Books. The first book deals
with worship and diyine service, the second book with woridly
usages, the third book with destructi ve evils and the fourth book
w'th conslructree virtues. Ihya in original is a book in Arabic
compnsmg four parts and lts abridged addition in Persian was
termed by the author himself as 'Kimiyae Sa'adat' or the
rouchstone of fortune. Unnecessary arguments of different sects
°ne ,housand years a8°> some matters not
‘
pr
!f
ent t,me and some sayings ofsome sages of less
reputahon have been omitted in the present English version. The
book has been, however, translated into Bengali in full by the
author himself without ommission.
SHORT LIFE OF IMAM GHAZZALI
Imam Ghazzali was bom
in 450 A.H. (1058 A.D ) in the
ah
f
rw
‘he district of Taus in Persia and hisname is
Abu Hamid Muhammad. His title is Hujjahil Islam or Proof of
Islam and his dynastic Htle is Ghazzali. His father was not a
famous person but his grand father was one of the leading men of
at age. His father died while he was young leaving him under
the care °f his mother and grand father. Ghazzal is said to be the
Khnr,
3 V
n
ge in ““ dis,rict of Taus in
‘he province of
horasan m Persia. According to Maulana Shibli Nomani, his
fnCe5
I°
rShad
>
C business of weaving (Ghazzal) and therefore
ne retained his fanmly title Ghazzali (wea ver).
fan,
HIl EDUCATION: At the Hme of the death of Chazzali's
fndAhm^
n
f
ted
!u
e education of his two sons Muhammad
and Ahmad to one of his trusted friends. The latter imparted to
themprjmaryeduMHon and then sent them to a private Maktab.
he boys withm a short time committed the whole Quran to
memory and after that began to learn Arabic.
They were then admitted
in
a
free Madrasha. After
sometime, Imam Ghazzali
left his native village for higher
Vol-I
REVIVAL OF RELIGIOUS LEARNINGS
9
education for Zarzan and began to study under a great eamed
man Imam Abu Nasr Ismail. He used to take notes of his lectures
but m a certain joumey he was robbed of these notes by some
dacoits along with his other belongings. He took courage, went
to the chief of the robbers and begged of the notes only to be
returned to him. It was retumed to him at his earnest entreaties.
Then he joined Nizamia Madrasha at Nishapur which was a
reputed seat of learning and a great educationist named Imamul
Haramain was its principal. He had 400 students of whom three
were most noted
- Harrasi, Ahmad-b-Muhammad and Imam
Ghazzali. The latter became so much grieved at his death that he
left Nishapur and went to Baghdad, the capital of the Caliphs. He
was then a young man of 28 years of age.
At Baghdad, he was appointed principal of Nizamiyah
Madrasha by Nizamul Mulk the chief vizier of the Turkish ruler
Malek Shah. Being thus appointed at an early age to such a high
post, his popularity as a great leamed man spread far and wide
and the rulers and the chieftains used to consult him in state
affairs and theological matters.
LECTURES OF IMAM GHAZZAU: In the lectures of the
Imam, hundreds of leamed men and dignitaries of the State and
even the ruling princes attended. His lectures were
full of
arguments and reasons and they were mostly recorded by
Sayeed-b-Fares and Ibn Lobban. They recorded nearly 183 of his
lectures
which
were
completed
in
a
book
named
Majalesse-Ghazzali.
The great Imam then turned his mind
to gain spiritual
heights and the circumstances leading to it were recorded by
him in his book Munkezum Minaddalal (Deliverance from
error). He was a follower of Imam Shafeyi in his early age but
in Baghdad he mixed freely with the peoples of all sects and
thoughts and
ideas. There were then the ShTas, the Sunnis,
Zindiqs, Magians, Scholastic theologians, Christians, Jews,
atheists fire-worshippers and idol worshippes. There were also
the Deists, the Materialists, the Naturalists, the philosophers.
They used
to meet in mutual wars of argumentations and
debates. This had suclj an effect in the mind of the Imam that his
whole life became changed and he began to search for truth with
a free mind. His old ideas disappeared and he began to live in

10
REYIYAL OF RELIGIOUS LEARNINGS
Vol-I
He
‘hen became 'nclined to Sufism but here practical
actions were more required than mere belief. Beng imbued with
drlsTndWe BafhdL
UP his Iu?rative post at Baghdad, wore Sufi
aress and left Baghdad suddenly one night in 488 A.H.
j.
He then w
,
ent to Damascus
closetted himself in a room of
and zfkr
TT*”** the d ‘Vine Services' ^editations
and Zikr. Thus he spent here two years in solitude. At the aee of
27 years, he was initiated by Pir Abu Ali Farnedi who waf the
spiritual guide of also the vizier Nizamul Mulk. After two years
he went to jBrusalem and visited the birth place of Jesus Christ
Z
dZi
99
he ViSi ted the ho,y shrine of
Abraham and
™ler 2^7 r Pr°miSeS:' H he wiI1 not 8°
‘he Darbar of any
er, 2) he will never accept their presentation, 3) he will not ioin
any rel.gious debates. He fulfilled thesepromises up to his death
Jnd sf
he
T.T
10 Mecca for pilgrimage and WsiteTaBo Medina
! nd
,
yedthere for a
'0ns *ime. When he returned home, he was
requested by the ruler to accept the post of the princiDal of
Nizamia Madrashah and he accepted
it. When the ruler was
assassmatedI by an assassin, he gave up the post and went to Tas
and closetted himself in a khankah. The new ruler~ted Ihe
mam to join his post of the principal but he dcclmedthe offer.
505 A^H
ie
nl
at hiS na
,
tiVe Vil 'a8e Taberan on 14tb Jamadis Sani in
.
. corresponding to 19th December 1111 A D
Ibn
Iaii 7 i
narrated a story about his death. He said: On Mondayearly in7h
and the
g
n
s
6 8?‘ UP fr0m HiS bed ' performed bis m0-Tng p aye
and
tben sem a man
to bring his coffin cloth. When
it was
rought he Idted it up to his eyes and said: Lord's command is to
breShiitst
n
fhe!
S' ** pr0lon8ed his le8s and immediately
eatned his last. The Imam left no son, but only daughters.
to write b
B
o°o?ff
S! Th
,
e Ima?
Iived nearly 55; years and be began
write books from his early age when he was 20 years old Hp
travelled for nearly 10 to 11 years and spent most
h «li
readlnS' wr
I
tinS and teaching. Besides this, he had to repW to
thousand letters wh.ch came from far and near for his deciton
arenoted!°
n
4°° b°°kS of which the Mlowing
THEOLOGY: Wasit (Shafeyi jurisprudence)
Basit
Waiir
(Cancn Law) (compendium), Bayanul OaoTatoe H Shateto
ulasatul Rasa.l (Qu.ntessence of jurisprudence), Fkhtesarul'
Vol-I
REVIVAL OF RELIGIOUS LEARNINGS
11
Mukhtesar, Gayatul Gaur, Mazmatul Fatawah (collection of legal
d$cisions), Risalatul Qudsiyya (canon laws of Prophet).
PRINCIPLES OF THEOLOGY: Tahsinul Muakhej, Shefaye
Alil (cure of diseases), Mankhul, Mustastfa jurisprudence.
JURISPRUDENCE:
Khulasatul Fiqh (quintessence of
jurisprudence) Wajiz, Iqtisad-fil-I'tiqad (exposition of
faith),
Al-Qaestas Mustaqim.
LOGIC:
Mizanul Amal, Mihakhul Nazar
fil Monteq
(whetstone of reflection on Logic), Mayatul Ilm (weighing scale
of science), AI-Ma'arif (Discourse on Logic). Mayarul Ilm
fi
Fannil Manteq (the weighing scale of the science of logic).
PHILOSOPHY:
Maqasidul
Falasifah
(aim
of
the
Philosophers), Munqezum Minaddalal (Deliverence from error),
an autobiographical statement of his spiritual progress) Kitabul
Arsayin (abridgement of Ihya), Resalatul Laduniyya (Ilham and
wahi).
SCNdLASTIC THEOLOGY: Tahafatul falasifah (destruction
of the philosophers), Iqtisad, Mustajhari (guide of novices),
Iljamal Awam
(vilification of peoples), Faysatul Zindiq
(refutation of atheists), Fikhrot wal Ibrah (Meditation and
contemplation), A1 Hikmat (wisdom of God), Haqiqatur Ruh
(realities of soul).
SPIRITUAL AND MORAL: Ihyao Ulumiddin (Revival of
religious Iearnings), Kimiyae Sa'adat (Touch stone of fortune),
Akhlaklul Abrar (conduct of the pious), Jawaharul Quran (Jewels
of Quran), Minhajul Abedin (path of the devout), Mirajus Saleqin
(steps
for the sojourners), Bidayataul Hidayah (beginning of
guidance), Mishkatul Anwar (Nicheof lights).
TAESIR: Yeakutut-Ta'wil (a commentary of the Quran in 40
volumes now lost).
Of the 400 books he compiled, some only have been
preperved in many libraries of Europe, while the Muslims did
not accept them as they should have been accepted. Besides, they
went so far as to burn some of his books which were lost forever
to the world.

12
REVIVAL of reugious learnings
VoI-I
IHYA
ULUMIDDIN: Revival of R„n„-
masler piece of Imam Gha 2Zali
Abuf r
f°
S *aences
- is 3
contemporary of Imam Ghazzali. Helaid thaf aK T
1' Was a
Ouran. Shaikh Abu MuZ!ZTh J
is near the
knowledge of the world arP
n
Sa
,
I<1:
3,1
t,le hghts of
from Ihya. Shaikh Abdullah^Idrees was^ '“'J* reWved
committed to memorv
u
Was a Sreat saint. He
times from first to lastand at the^end
Shaikh AIi read
25
to the students and
fte pom M
aC^
eadinS8avea feaat
committed
it to memorv MaoJ M
- 1y students of U>e Imam
resultof IlhamorinsDiratinn Th
Sa 'ntS re8arded the book as a
Held the book in his hand Tnd^WtMtatKMnbStapone^
which book is in my hand? ImmeH
Pu
e°Ple: Do y°° know
signs of lashes on hiiback and said^I * y
'6 showed them the
book. Last night, ImamgL^IU^J
WaS n°‘ 3 SUPPortec of the
Propeht and inAicted on me th«P ^T
' ” presence of the H°ly
disregard of the book. These«e!he sign^olladira onnv^badc.m^
GhazaH*wa^^^mudf^^l^j
E
^
i\
f?
>®: THe hoohs of Imam
they Preserved them in many hbraries^Bm
'nfiuroPe that
so much attention in Muslim countries Som^M
' d not
,
receive
men even did not ODen Hw
. ™
Muslim leamed
prohibitedthepeopletoreadthemT
^ them ' but rather
rarely fOUnd in the I^arie,
S^0"' his books ave
book compiled by the Imam af K-
*
'"l countnes- Mankhul is a
with completely free and indo
h
early age. Therein he wrote
foll°wer o
P
f MaSs of
nota
1blind
Mushm countries only
for this fault
'?t0 dlsreSard
111
ordered to be burnt and
it was
h
°
a"d
were
accepted them with honour
‘nt° action - EuroPe
destruction. The book
'M,,,
.i
,
d
,. presi-’rved them from
Muslim countries but it is nre*
6
? asefa ’
is not found
in
Huropealsoacceptedhi^rSs6" ”
libraries of Spain,
GHAZZALI'S INFLTJFMd7
ta
•
the modern opinion about relieinn
n° e5
Jf5
geration to say that
°f the Imam's thoughts^The^naiw hLoI
UC
|iI
dUe ‘° the influenee
ytewton Su"^S^Tth 1
VoI-I
REVIVAL OF RELIGIOUS LEARNINGS
13
noted leam men wrote many books which resound with the
opinions of Imam Ghazzali. In short, his thoughts reigned
supreme in their minds. His influence on Persian literature was
also great. He himself wrote Kimiyae Saadat in Persian which
influenced to a great extent the minds of Maulana Runii. Shaikh
Sa'di, Farid Uddin Attar, Shiraaji, Hafez and other poets and
Sufis. The works of such a learned man held in high esteem by all
should be widely read and circulated. Mr. Watt says: Ghazzali
has sometimes been acclaimed in both east and west as the
greatest Muslim thinker after Muhammad and he is by no means
unworthy of that great dignity.
PREFACE OF IMAM GHAZZALI
Take whatever the Apostle gave you and keep away from
whatever he forbade you -59:7 Quran.
Firstly,
I begin with the praise of God though our praise is
guide insufficient and meager in relation to His real glory.
Secondly, I invoke His blessings on all the prophets and specially
on His last and greatest Prophet Muhammad (peace be on them
all). Thirdly,
! pray for His help and grace that there should
remain in me firm will and incentive for writing the book Ihayo
Ulumiddin or the Revival of religious sciences.
FourthIy, O defamer, O heedles, O one denying truth, God
has i*emoved from my tongue the tie of silence and put on my
neck the necklace of arguments and reasons. It is my duty to
reply to what you argue. In other words, you have closed your
eyes from open truths and taken help from whatever is void and
untrue and praise ignorance.
If a man wants to remove
something from the evil practice and habits of men or expresses
his wish to translate his leaming into action in order that the
Almighty may prefer to purify his soul, let him keep himself
engaged in divine services and seek to atone for the sins that he
committed in his past
Iife and for which he has become
despaired. Let him keep aloof from the society of those persons
about whom the Holy Prophet said: The greatest punishment on
the Resurrection Day will be meted out to that leamed man
whom God has notgiven any benefit to his leaming.
It
is my firm conviction that there
is no reason for your
refusal to accept the truth except what has been stated below. In

14
REVIVAL OF RELIGIOUS LEARNINGS
VoI-I
othcr words, the disease which entered into the minds of the
People has also entered your mind. The meanineds
*at Uwy have given up the rules and regulahons for acnuiring ranks
gra^e
* "°*'™W
<
*iS affair is vei> «<00. and
LckLrd h^r i
°m
^
gi0rWart and lhis world 's reseding
backward, that death is near and the joumey is long, tha t provision i»
scanty.dangersaregreatbutthepathsareblocked.
P
God^are fif>"L
ngS a
.
nd
f
Cti°nS which have 8°‘ n° connection with
God are fit to be entirely rejected by the wise and those who seek
^dThe
I
La,hTL
diffiCUU
K
f0r 8 trave"er to the nex, worldt
ead
the paths, because there are injurious and destructive
them
e
Th
OI
|
tHe W7
bU ‘ ,herearen° passportand means to cross
them. The learned are the guides ,o theLe paths. They arThe
heirs of the prophets. Time has slipped out of their hands ThoLe
who are slaves to evil habits are alive. The devil is powerful over
henTA?mou
am0ng them ^ Vari°US Wnds of sins ™sguide
of thdsTorid Ind
r
T
°ne aT°
ng ‘hem iS enSrossed in the luioiries
fK
.
?
r “ and lts comforts and enjoyments. For this reason
the Tel!2l
y °1 them COnsider ?ood as bad and bad as good. Even
i- hK \
s
earninSs and sciences have become obiolete The
T?
°
guidance have almost disappeared from
this world
than
ha
P
t
Cd
o f
th
p
e
,rr,’
C ‘°T™T
there is n° °,her sci^nce
tnan that of Flah (Junsprudence). These are the laws nf
TdTanTT WT
h heIp the iudges in the administraLion of
Tho
and the rulers ln the administration of their countries
dohaT^rT
thCTe
!
S n° learning exccpt that of Munazara or
his
bate
The preSent learned man cherishes hope of victory over
informITth'*
T
kS meanS
t0 make him sileni- <> they
,nformed the people that there is no learning except the science nf
thendndsTLhe8^
which a speaher seeks* to inriuence
threesciences Thes
•
"C
fee n0 °,her science except these
,h
e
a
,
The SCIences of the next world and the learnines of
sslgasss
Vol-I
15
REVIVAL OF RELIGIOUS LEARNINGS
impediments that lay in the path of acquiring learnings beneficial
to theprophets and sages havebeen removed.
I have divided this Ihya into four books
- 1) the Book of
worship, 2) the Book of worldly usages, 3) the Book of destructive
evils, 4) and the Book of constructive virtues. I have discussed the
chapter of knowledge at the very beginning as it is of extreme
importance. It is necessary to discuss such learning at the outset
whichis a great help towards divine service according to a saying
of the Holy Prophet. He said: To seek leaming is compulsory on
every Muslim. I began with the chapter on knowledge in order to
separate the useful knowledge from the harmful knowledge as
the Prophet said: We Seek refuge to God from the knowledge
which is not useful.
(1) The Book of worship comprises ten chapters
-
(1) Knowledge,
(2) Articles of Faith,
(3) Secrets of Purity,
(4) Secrets of Prayer, (5) Secrets of Alms-giving, (6) Secrets of
Fasting, (7) Secrets of Pilgrimage, (8) Rules of Quran-reading,
(9) Rules of invocations and supplications and (10) observance of
daily duties according to fixed times.
(2) The Book of worldly usages consists of ten chapters -
(1) rules of eating and drinking, (2) rules of marriage, (3) rules of
eaming IiveIihood, (4) Iawful and unlawful things, (5) rules of
companionship and brotherhood
(6) rules of habitation in
solitude, (7) rules of joumey, (8) music and ecstasy, (9) rules of
enjoining good and forbidding evil, (10) rules of living as
exemplified by the character and conduct of the Prophet.
,
(3) The Book of Destructive evils comprises ten chapters -
(1) wonders of soul, (2) discipline of soul, (3) harms of stomach
and sexual passion, (4) harms of tongue, harms of anger, hatred
and envy,
(6) evils of the world,
(7) evils of wealth and
miserliness, (8) evils of show and pomp, (9) evils of self- conceit
and pride and (10) evils of vanity.
(4) The Book of constructive virtues comprises ten chapters
- repentance, (2) patience and gratefulness, (3) fear and hope,
(4) poverty and asceticism, (5) Tauhid (unity of god) and God-
reliance, (6) love and contentment, (7) intention, truthfulness
and
sincerity,
(7) self-examination and self-accounting,
(9)
meditation, (10) death and ponder over death.

16
REYIYAL OF RELIGIOUS LEARNINGS
Vol-I
I
t
t
t
tl
d
Cc
Ih
th
Some people wrote some books on these subjects, but this
book has got five special characteristics which are not found in
those books. Firstly, I have opened by the grace of God what they
closed up and
I have written in detail what they kept secret.
Secondly,
I have arranged what they kept scattered and
I have
brought together what they kept separate. Thirdly, I have made
short what they made long and corrected what they approved.
Pourthly, I have deleted what they repeated. Fifthly, I have made
this book easy to understand after disclosing the subtle matters.
These are the five specialities of this book.
I have placed the foundation of this work on four books for
two reasons. The first basic reason is that I have incorp>orated in
this book weli-arranged rules and their real nature, so that they
may be easily understood, as the knowledge by which the next
world
is known
is of two kinds
- knowledge of outward
behaviours and usages and the knowledge of revelation,
inspiration, secret and subtle matters. What
I mean by
this
knowledge is the knowledge for attaining the submum bonum or
the ultimate object of life. What I understand by the science of
outward behaviours and usages is the knowledge of practical
religion attended with actions in accordance with that
knowledge. The object of this work is only to narrate the science
of practical religion and usages and not to narrate the science of
revelation and inspiration, as there is no permission to put the
latter into black and white though the science of revelation is the
ultimate object of those who search after truth and the most
coveted matter in the eye of the extremely truthful, and the best
way of acquiring knowledge of worldly uses. The Holy Prophet
did not speak anything about the science of revelation except
through signs and symbols, because he knew that the wisdom of
men to understand
it is very
little. There is no means of the
leamed other than the path of the prophets, as the learned are the
heirs of the prophets. The science of practical religion are of two
kinds-open science of the actions of the physical senses and the
secret science of the functions of the heart. The actions which
keep connection with the physical senses are the actions of habits
or usages of life. The heart which comes from the unseen world
and is removed ultimately from the senses is influenced by either
the praiseworthy virtues or the blame-worthy vices. In short, the
science of practical religion
is divided into open and secret
sciences. The open science and usages of life. The secret science
Vol-I
REVIVAL OF RELIGIOUS LEARNINGS
17
keeps connection with the condition of heart and its qualities and
is sub-divided into praise-worthy virtues and blame-worthy
vices.
The second basic reason is this. I see a great enthusiasm of
students for study of jurisprudence or Fiqh. To those who do not
fear God, jurisprudence has turned into an object of pride and a
means for acquiring name and fame. Jurisprudence is of four
kins. As the objects which adorn the dear things are also dear, I
think it better that this book should be modelled into the form of
Figh or jurisprudence, so that the minds may be inclined to it. For
this reason, one who wants to attract the attention of the minds of
some men
to
the science of medicine remodels
it after
astronomical tests and writes a book after naming Tablets of
Health'. So also I have adopted some measures in this work, so
that the minds of the people are attracted towards such learning
which is beneficial to human life. As the minds of the people are
attracted to the science of medicine for preservation of the health
of body, so also it is necessary that the minds of the people are
attracted to the treatment of the diseases of soul and mind in
expectation of a happy and prosperous
life in the next world
which will last forever and forever. Physical happiness is short
and transientas compared to spiritual happiness in the hereafter.
Physique
is mortal while soul
is immortal. So
I pray
to the
Almighty for his help and succour for writing and completing
this book Ihyao Ulumiddin as He is the most Compassionate, the
mostMerciful.

Vol-I
KNOWLEDGE
19
CHAPTER I
ACQUISITION OF KNOWLEDGE
SECTION 1 - EXCELLENCE OF LEARNING
PROOF OF THE QURAN: God says: God, angels and those
°n
/
us
.Hc
1! bear ‘esHmony that there is no
f
* H
tf
" 3
v
18 ‘ Now ook' ° dear readers, how God began
attestation first by Himselt, then by His angels and then bvIhe
eame
C
d aL
,S
th
UnC,r
t00d^ tWs verse
'hat the ran" of the
earned and their honour are much high. God says* Those whn
mnk
58
VC
2 "HaarntT
'eSrned ' God ^'Hncrease their
58
. 12. Hazrat Ibn Abbas said about them: The rank of the
amTthe nff
6Ven hundred ,imes more tha» ‘hat of the believers
and the otterence between the two ranks is the distance of the
eoual mT
hUndred years ' God says: Are th°se who are Ieamed
equal to the tlliterate - 39
: 9 ? God says: The leamed amonJffi.
an
a
w^::
rG
b
o
f
most - 35:2s - G°dV- say. cod isrs
as a witness between me and you and
those who have eot
knowledge of the Quran - 13
: 43. God says: But those who had
been granted knowledge said: Alas for you, the reward of God is
best for those who believe and do good -28:80.
God says: These parabies We set forth for men and none
° n
^
erS ands ,hem exceP‘ the learned - 29
: 42. God says: lf they
hadon
!y
;
referred
t0 the Ap°sHe and to those charged with
amhonty among them, those of them who would investieate it
wou.d have know
it
- 4
: 93. God thus made knowledee
dependent upon thetr efforts. In the practical religion, Cod/
mmands have been placed upon the investigatton of the
learned and
their rank with the prophets for propagahon o?
commands. God says: O the children of Adam! I have sent
own to you raiment to cover your shame and adomment to you
but the raiment of piety is best - 7
: 25. God says: I have sent to
t tem a book and with knowledge I explained it in detail a euide
and a mercy to all who believe - 7
: 52. God says: I shall recount
their story with knowledge- 7
: 6. God says: It isa clearsieninC
earts o
th°^j t0 Wh°m knowIedge has reached - 29
: «. God
says. He created man and taught him to speak - 55 ; 2.
reti„7
ADI
!.
: TH
! H°'y Prophet said; God g'ves knowledee of
Igion and guidance to truth to one whose good He intends. He
said: The learned are the heirs of the prophets. From these, it is
understood that there is no rank above the rank of prophethood
and there
is no honour higher than
its inheritance. He said:
'Whatever is in heavens and the earth seeks forgiveness for the
leamed/ So the angels of heaven and earth remain busy in
seeking forgiveness for the learned and they remain busy with
themselves. What can be greater than this rank? The Prophet
said? 'Wisdom increases the honour of the noble and exalts a
servant as high as to raise him to the level of kings/ From this
tradition,
it is understood that even in this world the fruits of
learning can be enjoyed. This is also true that the Hereafter is
better and more lasting than this world.
The Holy Prophet said: Two traits of character are not united
in a hypocrite - good guidance and knowledge of theology. The
meaning of theology or jurisprudence will be discussed soon.
The lowest knowledge of a jurisprudent is that the Hereafter is
better than this world. When this knowledge will prevail over
him, he will be free from hypocrisy and show. The Prophet said:
The best of the people is a believing learned man who does good
when sought for, and when the people keep away from him, he
also keeps away from them. He said: Belief is without dress and
its dress
is God-fear,
its ornament
is shame and
its
fruit
is
knowledge. He said: The learned and the warriors are nearest to
the rank of prophethood/ The learned havebeen sent for which
the prophets were sent. They are guides to the people and the
warriors wage war in the path of God with their arms like the
apostles. He said: The death of a people is easier than the death of
one learned man. He said: Men are like the mines of gold and
sil ver. Those who were best in the days of ignorance are the best
in Islam provided they have got the knowledge of theology. He
also said:
I shall intercede on the Day of Resurrection and be a
witness for one who commits to memory forty traditions out of.
my followers and transmits these to them.
The Holy Prophet said: The ink of the learned
will be
weighed against the blood of the martyrs on the Resurrection
Day. He said: Whoever of my followers commits to memory forty
traditions will meet with God as a learned theologian. He said:
God is sufficient for the worries of one who acquires knowledge
of God's religion. He gives him provision from a source which he
has never conceived. He
said: God revealed
to Abraham: O

20
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
Vol-I
Abraham.
I am All- wise and I love every wise man. He said- A
learned man ls a trust of God on earth. He said: There will be two
groups among my people. When both the groups are good
the
people are good and when they are corrupt, the people become
rupt - the rulers and the theologians He said: Should the day
L°.™
l'^ereln my kno«;ledge for nearing God does not increase
let not the sun nse on that day. The superiority of a learned man
over a worshtpper ts like my superiority over the ordinary men
l,nko
f
knowl°dge with prophethood and how he
belittled the rank of the learned man without action, even thoueh
wom°hin^
r
n
S
HW
n
rShiPPinS a 'WayS and he wouId not k«ve
worshtpped had he not possessed knowledge. He said: The
superiority of a learned man over a worshipper
is like the
superiortty of moon over the stars. He said: There will intercede
Zt,*Tl.
n Day
,
the ProPhets' then the leamed and then
the martyrs- So the rank of the learned
is next to that of the
prophets and higher than that of the martyrs.
The Holy Prophet said: God has not given any man mo-e
ewellence than the knowledge of religion and one theologian is
more formidable to
the devil than
a thousand worshippers
Everythmg has its toundation and the foundation of this religion
is knowledge of theology. He said: The best part of your relicion
is its easiest and the best worship is (the acquisition of) religfous
knowledge. He said: The superiority of a beliering leamed man
over a believmg worhsipper is seventy degrees. He said: You are
living
in an age wherein
the theologians are many
the
Quran-readers and the preaches are few, the beggars are few and
e givers are many, wherein deeds are better than knowledge
ut soon there will come over you such an age wherein
the
eologians will be few, the preachers and the Quran-readers
many, the givers few and the beggars many, wherein knowledge
wd! be better than deeds. He said: There
is difference of one
hundred degrees between a worshipper and a learned man. The
stenty
e
ye
e
a
tWeen
‘W° ***“ " 38 the run of a melng ^or
The Holy Prophet was once asked: O Prophet of God, which
actton
is best. He said: Knowledge. He was then questioned-
Which knowledge do you mean? Hesaid: Knowledge about Cod
They said: We ask you about action but you speak of knowledge
The Prophet said: With your knowledge of God, a few actions
Vol-I
KNOWLEDGE
21
will suffice and your ignorance about God will not suffice even
though actions are numerous. He said: On
the Day of
Resurrection, God will raise up the worshippers and the leamed
men. He will say: O the congregation of thelearned men, I have
not imbued you with My knowledge but for My knowledge
about you. I have not placed knowledge in you in order to punish
you. Go, I have forgiven you.
Sayings of the sages: Hazrat Ali said to Kamil: O Kamil,
knowledge is better than wealth. Knowledge guards you butyou
are guarding wealth. Knowledge dispenses justice, while wealth
seeks justice. Wealth decreases with expense while knowledge
increase with expense. He said: A learned man is better than one
who prays and fights in the way of God. When a learned man
dies, such a calamity befalls on Islam which cannot be removed
except by his successor. Hazrat Ali said in poems:
Glory is due to none other than to the learned.
Guided are they and proofs to the seekers of guidance.
Everybody is honoured proportionate to his knowledge,
But the illiterate are disgraced, as enemies of the learned.
. Acquire knowledge, you willbeimmortal.
All men are dead, only the learned are alive.
The sage Ibn Aswad said: Nothing is more honourable than
knowledge. While the kings rule over the people, the learned rule
over the kings. Hazrat Ibn Mobarak was asked: Who are men? He
replied: The learned, He was again asked: Who are kings? He
replied: The ascetics. He was again asked: Who are the meanest?
He said: Those who exchange the religion for the world. He did
not consider anybody as a man except the learned, knowledge
distinguishes men from the lower animals and
it
is only for
knowledge that men are honoured. This honour is not due to a
man
for his physical strength, because a camel
is physically
stronger than a man. This honour is not for his large body as the
body of an elephant is bigger then that of a man. This honour is
not on account of his bravery as a ferocious beast is braver than a
man. This honour is not for his strength of too much eating as the
stomach of an oxe is bigger than that of a man. This honour is not
for his strength of sexual passion as a sparrow has got more
strength for coition than that of a man. This honour of a man is on
account of his knowledge and intellect.

22
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
Vol-I
The Holy Prophet said: Whoever has been given the Quran
and thinks th&t any one has been given something better, he has
degraded what God has exalted. Once the saint Fathul Musolli
was asked: Does not a sick man die for want of food, drink and
medicine? The people said: Yes, He said: Such is the condition of
heart. When the heart is not given wisdom and knowledge for
three consequitive days, it dies. It is a veritable truth that the food
of the heart is knowledge and wisdom. As food keeps the body
alive, these two things similarly keep the heart alive. He who
misses knowledge has got his heart diseased and its end is its
death, but he does not understand
it. When he leaves the world
and its works,liis power of sense goes away just as excessive fear
keeps one forgetful for a moment of the pangs of wound. But
when death takes away the burden of this world from a man, he
repents at the advent of his death but it comes to no use. His
condition is just like that of one who does not feel any pain in
swoon, but as soon as he recovers from his swoon, he begins to
feel pain. Men are in sleep but they are awake at death.
sage Hasan Basari said: The ink of the learned will be
weighed against the blood of martyrs and then it will be found
that the ink of the learned
is heavier than
the blood of the
martyrs. Hazrat Ibn Masud said: You should acquire knowledge
before your death. By One in whose hand there is my life, those
who were killed in the way of God would every time wish that
God should resurrect them, as learned men, as they will find the
honour meted out to the learned men there. Nobody
is born
learned. Learning is to be acquired. Hazrat Ibn Abbas said: To
discuss about learning in a portion of night is dearer to me than to
keep up awake throughout the night in prayer. Hazrats Abu
Hurairah and Imam Ahmad held this view. God advised us to
pray thus: O God, give us good in this world and good in the
hereafter
- 2
: 297. In explaining 'good' in
this verse, Hazrat
Hasan Basan said that it means Knowledge so far as this world is
concerned and Paradise so far as the hereafter is concerned. A
certain wise man was once asked: Which thing is to be hoarded?
He replied: That thing which will remain with you even if your
boat capsizes, that is knowledge.
EXCELLENCE OF LEARNING
QURAN: God says:
If a party from every band of them
remained behind, they could devote themselves to the religion - 9
Vol-I
KNOWLEDGE
23
God says: If you know not, then ask those who have got
knowledge of the Book -16:43.
HADIS: The Holy Prophet said: If a man seeks the path of
acquiring kriowledge, God guides him
to a path leading
to
Paradise. He said: Angels spread their wings out of cheer for the
seeker of knowledge. He said: To rise up at dawn and learn a
section of knowledge is better for you than to pray one hundred
rak'ats. He said:
If a man learns a chapter of knowledge,
it is
better than the world and its contents. He said: Seek knowledge
even if it be in China. He said: To seek knowledge is compulsory
on every Muslim, male and female. He said: Knowledge
is a
treasure house and its key is enquiry. So enquire and there are
rewards therefore for four persons
- the enquirer, the learned
man, the audience and their lover. He said: The ignorant should
not remain silent over their ignorance, nor the leamed over tjieir
knowledge. He said: To be present in an assembly of a learned
man
is better then praying one thousand rak'ats, visiting one
thousand sick men and attending one thousand funerals. The
Prophet was asked: O Messenger of God,
is
it better than the
reading of the Quran? He said: What benefit can the Quran do
except through knowledge? He said: He who seeks knowledge to
revive Islam and dies in that condition, there will be the
difference of only one step between him and the ^rophets.
SAYINGS OF SAGES:
Hazrat Ibn Abbas said: When I sought knowledge, I became
degraded, but when
I was sought for knowledge,
I became
exalted. Ibn Mubarak said: I wonder for one who does not seek
knowledge. How can he call himself towards honour? A certain
wise man said: I do not feel sympathy for anybody more than two
persons 1) one who seeks knowledge but does not understand it
and 2) one who understands knowledge but does not seek
it.
Hazrat Abu Darda's said: To learn one point is better than to pray
the whole night. He said: Either be a learned man, or a student, or
an auditor, but not anything else. Hazrat Omar said: The death of
one thousand persons who pray all the nights and fast all the
days is a lesser calamity than the death of one learned man who is
versed in lawful and unlawful things of God. Imam Shafeyi said:
To seek knowledge is better than optional prayers. Hazrat Abu
Darda'a said: He who thinks that to go at dawn in search of
knowledgeis not jihad isdeficientin intellect.

24
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
EXCELLENCE OF TEACHING
KNOWLEDGE
25
Vol-I
QURAN: God says: When they return to them, they warn
their people, so that they may guard themsel ves - 9
: 122. It means
teaching and guidance. God says: Remember when God took a
covenant from the People of the Book - you shall surely make it
known to mankind and not conceal
it - 3
: 187.
It shows that
teaching was binding on them. God says: A party from them
conceal the truth although they know it - 2
: 140. This shows that
concealing truth is unlawful. God says: Don't conceal evidence,
for whoever conceals it is wicked at heart - 2
: 283. The Prophet
said: God does not give a learned man any knowledge until He
takes from him a covenant as He took covenant from
the
prophets
- namely
to make
it known
to the people and not
conceal it God says: Who is better in speech than one who calls
towards God and does good - 41
: 33? God says: Call towards the
way of your Lord with wisdom and good sermon - 16
: 125. God
says: He teaches them the Book and wisdom - 2
: 123.
HADIS: The Holy Prophet said to Mu'az when he was about
to start for Yemen: If God gives guidance to a man through your
help, it is better than the world and its contents. He said: If a man
learns a section of knowledge to teach it to the people, he will be
given the rewards of seventy Siddiqs (true righteous men). Jesus
Christ said: He who acquires knowledge, acts up to it and teaches
lt to the people, will be called great in the kingdom of heavens.
The Prophet said: On the Day of Resurrection God will say to the
worshippers and the warriors: Enter Paradise. The learned will
then say: By virtue of our learning, you have worshipped and
fought. God
will then say: You are
Iike some of my angels.
Intercede and your intercession will be accepted. So they will
mtercede and enter Paradise. This rank they will get for that
knowledge which reached others and not for the knowledge
which did not reach others but remained with them. The Prophet
said: God will not take away knowledge from men after He has
given it to them, rather He will withdraw it after taking the li ves
of the learned men. Whenever a learned man will pass away, the
knowledge with him will also pass away and at last there will be
none left except the ignorant leaders. Whenever anything will be
asked
to them, they will give decision without knowledge for
which they
will be misguided and
will misguide others. The
Prophet said:
If a man after acquiring knowledge keeps
it
Vol-I
concealed God
will drag him with the bridle of
fire on the
Resurrection Day.
The Holy Prophet said: How excellent a
gift and how
excellent a present is a word of wisdom which you hear and
remember and then carry it and teach it to your brother Muslim.
It is equal to worship for one year. He said: Accursed is the world
and what is therein except one who remembers the glorious God,
one who makes friendship with Him, one who learns and
teaches. God, His angels, the inmates of heaven and earth, even
the ant in its hole and the fishes in the sea like one who teaches
good to the people. He said: A Muslim gives his brother Muslim
no greater benefit than a fair tradition which has reached him
and which he subsequently transmits
to him. He said:
If a
believer hears a good advice and then translates it in to action, it
is better than his worship for one year. The Prophet once came
out and saw two assemblies - one was calling God and offering
their supplications and another giving
the people good
instructions. The Prophet
said: The
first group
offer
supplications to God. If He wishes, He may grant them and if He
wishes He may reject them. Another group are giving good
instructions to the people. I have been sent as a teacher. Then he
went to them and took his seat among them.
The Prophet said: The simile of guidance and knowledge
with which God sent me
is like that of pro/use rain falling
upon a certain locality. One spot became full of water and
consequently abundant herbs and grasses grow therein. The
ditches and the canals in another spot reserve water and God
gives benefit
to mankind therewith. They drink water
therefrom, irrigate their lands and grow crops. Then there is a
spot which neither hoards water, nor grows any grass and
herb. The first simile is that of a man who gets benefit from his
knowledge. The second
simile
is
that of a man who does
benefit
io
others. The third simile
is that of a man who
is
deprived
of both the benefits. The Prophet said: One who
guides towards something good is like one who does it.
The Holy Prophet said: When a man dies, all his actions stop
except three - 1) a permanent endowment for charity, 2) useful
knowledge (7) and righteous successors. He said There is no envy
except for two persons - 1) one whom God has given knowledge
according to which he conducts himself and teaches
it to the

26
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
VoI-I
people. 2) and one whom God has given wealth and power to
spend
it and he spends
it in good deeds. He said: May God's
mercy be upon my successors. He was asked: Who are your
successors? He said: Those who Iove my ways and teach them to
the people.
SAYINGS OF SAGES
Hazrat Omar said: He who learns a Hadis and induces one to
act up to
it will get the rewards of one who translates
it into
action. Hazrat Ibn Abbas said:
If a man teaches good
to the
people, everything seeks forgiveness for him, even the fishes of
the sea. A
certain wise man said: A learned man
is an
intermediary between God and men? So see how he acts as an
intermediary. A learned man said: The learned men are the lights
of
ages. Each is a light in his own time giving light to the
people of his time.
Hazrat
>.asan Basari said: But for the learned, the people
would have been animals. In other words, learning takes a
man to the limit of humanity from the limit of animality. The
Prophet
said
as
reported by
Muaz-b-JabaI: Acquire
knowledge, because its acquisition is fear of God, search for it
is worship, its study is praise, search for it is jihad, teaching it
to him who does not know is alms-giving, imparting it to those
who are worthy
is meritorious.
It
is the friend in journey,
companion in solitude, guide to religion and light to them in
happiness and misfortune, bosom friend
to a stranger and
become
to
tne path of Paradise. Through
it, God
exalts a
nation, makes them leaders and guides of good. Seeing them,
others also become guides to good and the people follow them!
The angels urge them
to work. Everything, dry and fresh
seeks forgiveness for them, even the fishes in sea, insects and
worms, beasts in forests, cattle and sheep and even the stars in
s.cy seek forgiveness for them, Knowledge gives Iife to 'a dead
eart,
lt
is a light of eyes in darkness and gives strength to
body after removing weakness. By its help, a man reaches the
rank of the pious. To think of it is like fasting, and its study is
like prayer. By its help, God is obeyed and worshipped, by its
help warning is giyen, by its help, unity of God is understood
tie of blood is maintained and lawful and unlawful thines are
known.
6
Vol-I
KNOWLEDGE
27
PROOF OF REASON
The proof of reason for the excellence of knowledge is this. If
the word excellence is not understood, it is not possible to know
the excellence of other thing. For instance, if one desires to know
whether Zaid is a wise man, he should know first the meaning of
the word wisdom and then of Zaid or else he will go astray.
Excellence is the additional quality of a thing which has got no
defect. It is said that a horse is better than an ass. If the quality of
carrying loads is taken, both are the same but a horse has got
some additional qualities which are not found in an ass
- the
quality of running fast and physical beauty. An animal is sought
for
its quality and not for
its body. Now understand why
knowledge is better. As a horse is called better than an ass for its
quality of running fast, so you will call knowledge better if it is
compared to other qualities, Knowledge is good for its own sake
and not for its connection with other qualities.
All precious things fall into one of three groups - 1) what is
sought for its own intrinsic value, 2) what is sought as a means to
an end, 3) and what is sought for both. What is sought for its own
instrinsic value, for instance knowledge is noble. What is sought
as a means to an end is gold and silver which are mere pieces of
stone having no value of their own. If God had not made them
instruments of purchasing things, their value would have been
equal to other stones. Knowledge is precious for its own sake,
because with its help the happiness of the next world and Divine
Vision can be gained. It is not so in case of gold and silver. What is
sought for both, that is for its own sake and as a means to an end
is physical health. If the body is healthy, all things can be easily
done, such as eating and drinking and other works. But the object of
these things is to gain happiness in the hereafter and neamess to God.
If this object is kept in view, you will get pleasure in the acquisition of
knowledge. The highest rank ofman is the attainment of happiness in
the next world and the most excellent things are the ways that lead to
it. So knowledge is the root of good fortune in this world and in the
next. The result of knowledge is to enjoy neamess of God, to keep
company with the angels and the pious divines which are objects of
the next world and its result in this world is honour, influence over the
rulers and the people. So acquisition of knowledge and its teaching ar
excellent actions in order to seek good of this world and good of the
next and it is most laudable with the above object.

28
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
Vol-I
The
affairs of this world do not become orderly except
through activities, but the human acti vities are divided into three
categories.
1) The
first category includes four fundamental
actiyities without which the world can not go on in order.
(i)
Agriculture for raising food stuffs for maintaining lives, weaving
for manufacturing clothes, architecture for building houses and
goyernment for regulating human relations for living in peace
T
u
e SeCOnd cate80ry 'ncludes such acHviHes as
are
,
pful to the above mentioned activities, such as iron cratts
or ploughs for cultivaHon, instruments for spinning and weaving
clothes and other implements. 3) The third category include!
such activities as are supplementary to the principal industries
s“cIo
y
,h
m
e
e
s
nti0ned ' SUCh 35 eati"8' drinking' makinS dresscs -
These activities are necessary for human habitation iust as
the vanous organs of the body are necessary for up-keep of the
rori!fim °/8a
V
S ° f thG b0dy aIso are dj vided into three
h-I?S ^
^ Th
l fundamental organs, such as heart, liver and
veins* and^h
at
k
S
h
heIpfUl
u
princiPal organs are stomach,
ve,ns and back-bone without which they can not function. 3)
hat is supplementary to the above two categories for perfection
are nails
f,ngers, eye brows etc. Out of these three categories, the
most noble are the fundamental things, out of which^the i^iost
noble
is government on account of which peaceful habitation
becomes poss,ble. For th,s reason, experienced and expert men
are necessary to run the government.
•
. Admin 'stration >S divided into four classes. (I) The first class
is the hignest as it is thc government of the prophets and their
P«»Dt Q)Ne
Prl
0V
n
‘he PUb 'iC and private mattes of the
people. (2) Next is the admimstration of temporal rulers over the
publ.c matters of the people and not their private matters
(3 )
Next ,s the administration of the learned and the wiTe over ,he
peopte in the matter of the religion of God as they are the heirs of
,T,h,
rOP
l
“ ,nvolves thou8hts of the privileged few. (4) Next
ih
e adm,n,strall °n of the preachers which involves the
oroohets 1'
Common men - After the administration of the
prophets the most noble ,s the diffusion of knowledge wherebv
tnwarl
P
f’
a ,° saved from evd and destructive habits and are led
towards fortune and constructive virtues. This
is the goal of
knowledge and education.
8
Vol-I
KNOWLEDGE
29
Intellectual
activities are more excellent than the other
activities, because the excellence of an activity is known by three
things - (1) by examining the natural qualities of a man by the
help of which an activity is recognised. For insiance, acquisition
of knowledge is better than learning a language as knowledge
can be acquired by intellect, while language can be learnt
through the sense of hearing. As intellect is better than the sense
of hearing, so knowledge
is better than language.
(2) By
examining the extent of human usefulness,
for instance,
agriculture
is superior to the craft of a goldsmith.
(3) By
observing the excellence of a business, for instance, the business
of a goldsmith is better than that of tanning hides. Knowledge
also has got the above three qualities.
(1) Firstly,
it is widely
known that the science of religion is the path of the hereafter.
Perfect knowledge and bright intellect can acquire it. This is the
most noble attribute of a man, because owing to this attribute,
trust of God has been accepted by him and through
it, he can
enjoy the neighbourhood of God. (2) Secondly, there is no doubt
that the people in general get benefit of knowledge as its extant of
usefulness is very wide and it contributes to the happiness of this
world and the hereafter. (3) Thirdly, knowledge is a thing which
heals and governs the hearts and souls of men. Man is the lord of
creation and the lord of human organs is his heart. A spiritual
teacher purifies the heart and guides it towards God. So teaching
is the finest mode of worship. The heart of a learned man is one of
the good stewards of God. What rank is therefore higher than
that in which a man
is an intermediary between his Lord and
fellow-men to draw them closer to God and to paradise?
SECTION 2
PRAISEWORTHY AND BLAMEWORTHY
BRANCHES OF KNOWLEDGE
COMPULSORY LEARNING (FARZE AYIN)
The Holy Prophet said: To seek learning is compulsory on
every Muslim. He said: Seek knowledge even though in China.
There
is difference of opinion among the learned as to which
branch of knowledge is obligatory on an individual. There are
about twenty different groups in
this matter. The scholastic
theologians any that
it
is scholastic theology because
it
contributes towards understanding of Tauhid and the attributes
of God. The Jurists say that it is Fiqh or jurisprudenee, because

30
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
KNOWLEDGE
31
Vol-I
with
its help worship, worldly
allairs, lawful and unlawful
things can be understood and known. The traditionists say that it
is the knowledge about the Quran and the ways of the Holy
Prophet. The Sufis say that it is Sufism. So on and so forth. Abu
Taleb Makki said that it is the knowledge about the five pillars of
Islam.
Knowledge is of two kinds - knowledge of practical religion
and knowledge of spiritual matters. The knowledge which
Is
compulsory appertains
to practical religion which deal with
three matter
- beliets, actions and prohibitions. For instance,
when a sane man attains puberty, it becomes compulsory on him
to learn the words of attestatio>j"There is no deity but God and
Muhammad is the servant and apostle of God. To know its inner
meaning does not then become compulsory on him. He
is to
believe
it without any doubt and
proof. The Prophet
first
required only mere verbal acceptance of Islam and confession of
faith from the Arabs. What was compulsory on them at that time
was fulfilled. After that, knowledge of the duties to do became
compulsory on them.
These duties deal with actions and prohibitions. As regards
actions,
if a Muslim reaches the early afternoon prayer,
it
becomes compulsory on him to know first how to pray it and to
put it into action. This is the case with him in case of other prayers
also.
If he
Iives up
to
the month of Ramazan,
it becomes
compulsory on him to know the rules of fasting and then to fast.
This is the case with Pilgrimage, Zakat and other duties ordained
by God and binding on all Muslims.
AS TO PROHIBITIONS:
It depends upon circumstances
and new events. It is not compulsory on the blind man to know
which sight is unlawful, on the mute to know which words are
unlawful. So to know a thing is not compulsory on a Muslim who
does not require
it.
If after the acceptance of Islam
there
is
anybody who wears silk dress or takes property of another man
by force or l°°ks to a strange woman with passion, he must know
how to restrain himself from these things.
As
to beliefs and thoughts of mind,
their knowledge
is
obligatory according to the state of mind. Thus if a man feels any
doubt in his mind about the meaning of attestation formulas, it
then becomes compulsory on him to know what will remove that
Vol-I
doubt. When a duty becomes binding on a man, to acquire
knowledge about it becomes binding on him. As a man is not free
from hatred, envy and impulses of evil, it becomes compulsory
on him to know some of the evils as described in the Book of
destructive evils. Why should
it not be compulsory when the
Prophet said: Three things are destructive - sordid miserliness,
vehement passion and
self- conceit. Other evils follow these
three destructive
evils. To remove these evils from mind
is
compulsory. If a man is converted to Islam, what is compulsory
on him is to believe in paradise, hell, resurrection day, judgment
day. The Prophet said: To acquire learning is binding on every
Muslim. He did not say to learn Alif, Lam or Mim, but he said to
learn the science of actions. As actions become gradually
compulsory on him, to acquire knowledge about these duties
becomes gradually compulsory on him.
FARZE KEPAYAH
(COMPULSORY DUTY ON COMMUNITY)
Know, O dear readers, that learning about the duties are
divided into two categories
- those which are connected with
religion and those which are not so connected. The religions
learning are those which came from the Holy Prophets and in
which there is no question of intellect, and the learnings that are
not connected with the religion are Mathematics, Medicine etc.
They are of three kinds
- praiseworthy, blameworthy and
permissible. The sciences which are necessary for progress in the
world are praiseworthy, such as Medicine, Mathematics
etc.
These are Farze Kefayah or binding on the community as a
whole. Farze Kefayah is such compulsory duty without which no
nation can go on in this world. If a man at least acquires such
leaming or science in a town or locality, all other people in the
town or locality get absolved from its sin.
lf, however nobody
Ieams it, all will be transgressors. The sciences which should be
learnt for agriculture, administration, industry, horticulture,
weaving etc. are Farze Kefayah. To be expert in such learnings is
not Farze Kefayah. The leamings which are blameworthy are
sorcery, talismanic science juggling, gambling and the like. The
learnings which are permissible are poetry, history, geography,
biology etc.
All learnings connected with the religion are praiseworthy,
but when any other learning
is mixed with any of thein,
it

32
Vol-I
Vol-I
KNOWLEDGE
33
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
becomes sometimes blameworthy. The praiseworthy learnings
comprise sources branches helptul and supplementary
learnings. They are therefore of four kinds.
1)
Sources of religious leamings are four in number (a) the
Book of God, the Sunnah or usages of the Holy Prophet, the
unanimous opinions of Muslim jurists (Ijma) and the sayings of
companions. Ijma is the third source of Islam as it shows the path
towards the usages of the Prophet. The first source is the Quran
and the second is the Sunnah. The fourth source is the sayings of
the companions because they saw the Prophet, witnessed the
coming down to revelations and they saw what others did not see
through their association with the Prophet.
2)
Branches of learnings of religion are drawn from the
sources not according to the literal meaning but according to the
meaning adduced
by
the
mind,
thereby
writing
the
understanding as indicated by the following Hadis: A judge shall
not sit in judgment when angry. This means that he shall not pass
judgment when he
is pressed by calls of nature, hunger and
disease. The last thing is of two kinds. One kind relates to the
activities of the world, such as the books of law and is entrusted
to the lawyers and jurisprudent; and the other kind relates to the
activities of the hereafter. The latter
is the science of the
conditions of the heart and
of
its praiseworthy virtues and
blameworthy evils.
3)
The third
is the sciences helpful
to the praiseworthy
sciences such as the science of language and grammar which are
necessary
to know the Quran and Sunnah. They are not
themselves religious education. They were not necessary for the
Holy Prophetas he was illiterate.
4)
The fourth kind
is the supplementary sciences and
is
connected with pronunciation of words and different readings
and meanings, such as tafsir, knowledge of revocation of verses,
books on authoritative transmission, biographies of illustrious
companions and narrators of traditions.
These are the religious learnings and are praiseworthy and as
such Farze Kefayah or binding on the community as a whole.
If you
question: Why have you included
Fiqh
or
jurisprudence within the worldly sciences and Faqihs or
jurisprudent as worldly scholars, the reply is this. Fiqh contains
the laws of the administration of the world and Faqihs are such
lawyers. There is of course no doubt that a Faqih also deals with
religion, but that is done through the intermediary of this world
as the world is the seed ground of the hereafter. The religion does
not become perfect without the world. If you leave the religion
with the rulers, you will find that the religion is the foundation
and the ruler is its guard. That which has got no foundation it
destroyed and that which has got no guard is also destroyed.
Rule can not go without a ruler and the instrument of rule is PttjH
or administrative laws. The government does not beiong
primarily
to the religious sciences.
It
is well-known thdt
pilgrimage does not become perfect unless a companion is takeh
for protection from the ruffians and robbers in joumey, but Haj
or pilgrimage is one thing, rule for pilgrimage is another thing,
guard is a third thing and the laws are a fourth thing. The object
of Fjqh is to give knowledge of administration. This is supported
by the fd!lowing Hadis: Nobody can give legal decision except
three- ruler, authorised agent and one not so authorised and who
gives decision out of his own accord. A ruler or leader is qualified
to give legal decisions. One who
is authorised by him
is his
deputy. Except these two, the third person is called an intruder
who undertakes the responsibility himself. The companions in
general refrained from giving legal decisions, but when they
were asked about the Quran and the learnings of the hereafter,
they did not remain silent.
It may be said that the argument does not apply to various
acts of worship about which a Faqih gives decision. In reply, it
may be said that Fiqh gives decision abouf the fol!owing matters
of religion - Islam, Prayer, Zakat, Halal and Haram. About Islam,
a Faqih pays attention only to outward confession of Kalema
Tauhid but the heart or mind is outside his domain. The Proj^het
kept the rulers and the warriors outside it. He questioned a man
who praised another man as a martyr: Have you examined the
heart of the killed? He uttered Kalema Tauhid out of fear of being
killed and then he was killed.^The jurisprudent will give decision
that his Islam was good even though he uttered
it under the
shadow of sword. This is therefore a matter of this world. For this
reason, the Holy Prophet said:
I have been ordered to fight the
people until their lives and properties are safe in my hand, but it
will come to no help in the hereafter. What will hlp him there is

34
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
Vol-I
the light of hearh its secret thoughts and its sincerity which are
outside the domain of Fiqh.
ABOUT PRAYER: A Faqih will give decision of correctness
of prayer
if the outside formalities are observed even though
one's mind was absent in prayer from first to last. This kind of
prayer will be of no use in the hereafter. As verbal expression of
Kalema Shahadat will be of no use in the hereafter, so also the
outward formalities of prayer will come of no use there. The
actions of rnind and God-fear which appertain to the actions of
the hereafter and which help the outward actions are outside the
domain of a Faqih or jurisprudent.
ABOUT ZAKAT: A Faqih will see whether Zakat has been
realised according to th prescribed rules. It is related that the
judge Abu Usuf gave decision that if a man makes gift of his
wealth to his wife at the end of a year and takes back that wealth
to him by gift, it is alright although it is done to avoid payment of
Zakat. On this point, Imam Abu Hanifa declared that it is the
result of his knowledge of Fiqh and it is correct and the result of
worldly wisdom, but it will be of no use in the hereafter and its
harms in the hereafter will be greater that its benefits.
ABOUT HALAL AND HARAM: To abstain from an
unlawful thing
is piety and there are four grades of piety: (1)
Piety which is required for attestation of truth. If a man gives it
up, he is not qualified to act as a judge, administrator or witness.
This kind of God-fear is only to save oneself from all unlawful
things (2) The second grade of piety is that of a pious man. He
saves himself even from doubt whether a certain things is lawful
or unlawful. The Holy Prophet said: Discard that which
is
doubtful
for that which
is not doubtful. He also said: Sin
is
heart-alluring
(3) The third grade of piety
is that of the
God-fearing man who gives up even a lawful thing for fear of
falling into an unlawful thing. The Prophet said: Nobody can be a
God-fearing man unless he gives up what causes no harm to him
for fear of what causes harm. For instance, such a man does not
state all affairs to the people lest he is drawn to back-biting or he
fears to eat a delicious food or drink lest it stimulates passion and
lust which drive the people to commit unlawful things. (4) The
fourth grade is the piety of the siddiqs or extremely religious man
who gives up everything except God for fear of spending one
single hour of life for nothing.
VoI-I
KNOWLEDGE
35
Out of the above four stages, only the first one is within the
domain of a Faqih and not the other three. The Holy Prophet once
said to Wabisaa: Consult your conscience even though they give
you decision
(thrice). A Faqih does not express opinion
regarding the machinations of the heart but confines his opinion
on things which are subject matters of courts. His jurisdiction is
Iimited to the matters of the world.
Science of the road to the hereafter is divided into two parts -
the science of revelation and the science of practical religion. The
science of revelation
is the primary object of the science of
practical religion. A certain Sufi said: I fear the bad end of a man
who has got no portion of the knowledge of revelation. The Ieast
portion is to believe it and place it to those who are worthy of it. A
certain sage said: Whoever has got two characteristics-here say
and pride-will never be blessed with this secret science. Anotl er
sage said: Whoever is addicted to this world or persists in his low
desires will not attain this secret science though he might learn
the other sciences. This secret science is the science of the Siddiqs
and those who are in the neighbourhood of God. This is a light
which illumines the heart, cleansing
it of all impurities and
blameworthy sins. He understands now what he heard before
but did not understand. he comes to learn the etemal and perfect
attributes of God, His works and wisdom in the creation of this
world, the meanings of prophethood, the devil, the angels, the
cause of revelation on Prophets, the meaning of Paradise, Hell,
punishment of grave, Bridge, Balance, accounts and many other
things.
*
Some say that these things are mere examples, but God has
reserved for the pious what no eye has seen, no ear has heard and
no heart has conceived. Some say that man knows nothing of
Paradise except its attributes and names. Others hold that some
are mere patterns and some are identical with the realities which
these names signify. Likewise others hold
that limit
to
the
knowledge of God
is one's inability to reach
it. The object of
secret knowledge is to remove the covers of doubt over these
things from mind and the appearance of such light therein which
clears everything like day light. It is possible owing to the light of
heart.
It
is
like a mirror through which one can see clearly
everything that falls on it if is cleared of all impurities therein.
The science of the heart
is that by which these impurities are

36
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
Vol-I
removed from the.heart as these impurities ar impediments or
obstacles
td the knowledge of God's attributes. The mode of
clearing thenri is the abstinerice from low desires and passions
and following the ways of the prophets. Thus to whatever extent
the heart is cieansed and made to face the truth, to that same
exteiit.wiii it retiect its reaiity. this cannot be attained without
disdpiirie and efforts. This secret science cannot be written in
books, but it can be gained by experience as a gift of God. About
this sciehce,
tire Holy .Prophet said: this
is such a knowledge
which is like a hidden things. None can grasp it except those who
know God. Don'tdespise such learned man whom God has given
a f>drtion of it, as God does hot despise a man on whom He gives
agift.
The second kind of practical religion is the praiseworthy and
blameworthy sciences of the states of the heart. Its praise- worthy
qualities are patience, gratitude,
fear, hope, tontentment, as
crititishni, God-fear, generosity, recognition of the gift of God
under all drcumstances, good faith, good conduct, truthfulness
and sincerity. To know the limits of these attributes, their real
nature and the mcans whereby they are attained, their results
and their signS are included in the Science of the hereafter. The
blame-worthy
; evils are the following-fear of poverty,
displeasure over pre-decree, envy, hatred, hypocrisy, flattery,
hope for living long, pride, show, anger, enmity, greed,
miserlinesS, self-conceit, to honour the rich, to look the poor with
contempt, haughtiness, vanity, boasting, loss of fear of God,
expression of piety, lukewarm support for truth, secretly
fostering ertmity with outward of friendship, revenge, deceit,
breach of trust, harsh treatment, contentment with the world,
oppressioh, loss of shame and kindess. These are the faults of the
mind, roots of evil deeds ahd miseries.
The opposing qualities are praise-worthy and the fountain
heads of all good deeds. To know theit real nature belongs to the
Science of the hereafter and to know it is compulsory on the part
of a learned man of the hereafter. Whoever tums away from it
will be destroyed
in the hands of the Klhg of kings just as
anybody.going against the temppral ruliers and the iawS of a state
woiild be destroyed. The attention of the jurisprudents with
respect to the compulsory sciehces is towards the world ahd the
attention of these people is towards the good of the hereafter. If
Vol-I
KNOWLEDGE
37
any Faqih is asked about sjncerity, God-reliance etc., he wouid
make delay in reply, but as soon as he is askedabout divOrce apd
other matters, he wilj at once reply and deaj with
subipje
intricacjes.
Ainong the learned men of practical sciences, those who are
God fearing keep attached to the leamed men of secret sciences.
As a student sits in school, so Imam Shafeyi used to sif near
Shaiban Ray apd ask him: How shall | do this work? TTie pepple
asked Ipaam Shafeyi: Are you asking questions to a Beduin? He
said:
Tjiis man has learnt what we have not learnt.
Ipiaip
Ahmad-b-Hamj)al and thya- b-Mayen could npt agree on a
pertajn matter and they therefore went tp Maruf^arkhi who was
not equal to them in the science of practical religion. They said t°
him: The Prophet said: What wilj you dp whenypu w*U not find a
ipatter in the Quran and Spnnah? He said: Ask the pious men
among you and consult them in this matter* We havecproe to you
for this.
Somepne said- The learned roen of exoteric knowledge qre
the ornaments of the world and the staite but the learned pien of
exoteric knowledge are the ornaments of the kingdoro and
angjes. Hazrat Jun ajd said: My spiritual guide said tp rne once:
With whpro do you keep company when you jeave roy hiouse? I
said:
I keep coropany witji Mohabasi. He said: Yes, fojjow his
knowjedge apd manner but avoid the subtletjes pf his schpjastic
theology and return it to him. Whpn I left hijn, I heard him say:
May God make ypu first a Muhaddis (traditionist) and then an
ascetic (Sufi), but not first an ascetjc apd then a traditionist. Its
meaning is that he should acquire first the science pf tradition
and leaming ancj then becoroe ap ascetic and he will jhen get
salvation, but he who becomes an ascetic before acquisition of
knowledge throws hipaself into faults.
As to Philosophy,
it is not a single branch of science but
comprises four suhjects. The first subject includes Geometry and
Arithmetic, both of which are permissible for those who are firm
in faith. The second subject is Logic which is a science of reason,
and
it sjates proof, reason and cause. Both these are included
within tkeology. The third subject is the science of Sufisrrt or the
science of His being and attritutes of God. This is also included
within theology. The fourth subject is Physics of which some

38
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
VoI-I
notright.
COntradiC* Sharia ' a"d
reIigion and are ‘heretore
I shall describe the character and conduct of the early Faqihs
the^rie™
n
f^
0t
^
er °b,eCt exceP f to 8a 'n the pleasure of LordTnd
he signs of the leamed men of the hereafter were known to them
om their conditions. They lived not only for the silence of Fiqh
but also for the science of heart, The companions did not pubUsh
ooks on Fiqh or read them. So also the Imams did not compile
narrate^h
"7 eXpCTtS
the science of Rcl h - Soon we shall
attack thn!
1V
h
S 0f
.
s?me noted FatIihs not, to attack them but to
attack those who claim to be their folIowers act and contrary to
the,r character and conduct. The noterfFaqihs are f“e: Imam
bu Hanria Imam Malek, Imam Shafeyi, Iman Ahmad-b-
^
ba
H
an
,r
?am Sufiyan Saori ' £veryone of them was an
scehc, devout, learned m the science of the hereafter, law given
or
e peop e, seeker of God's pleasure through the help of Fiqh
Everyone of them possessed five qualities, but themodern
Faqihs accepted only one of these qualities. That is research in to
ennJTnT.h
5*^eta
’ /
°f Rqh ' The four other 9ual>ties relate to the
g00d 0f?he hereafter and °nly one relates to the good of this
SSr
f°IIOWed only in resPect of °ne q«a1ity and not
IMAM ABU HANIFA
Hewas a great Imam and a great ascetic and God fearing
man. He sought God's pleasure by his knowledge Ibn Mobarak
said that Imam Abu Hanifa had good character and conduct and
obseryed prayer and fast too much. Hammad-b-Solaiman said
narmrionhaTt^
habit of Praying the whole night and in another
narration half the mght. Once Abu Hanifa was walking in a street
when the people hinted at him saying: This man spends Te'
w
ole night in prayer. He said: I am ashamed before God that I
am descnbed by something which I don't possess. Regarding his
Abu HlTifa!nd h
SCm
,
Said: Ca 'iph Ve2id sent me once to
“1“ he wanted to appoint him as cashier of the state
treasury On his refusal to accept the post, he was given twenty
h-ipes. Now see how he fled away from a prize post and as a
resullf h
? recelved Pnnishment. Hakim-b-Hashim said:
I heard
about Abii Hamfa at Syria that he was the most trusted man for
which the Caliph wanted him ,o be appointed as a Treasorer T
the state treasury and threatened him with punishment
if he
Vol-I
KNOWLEDGE
39
would not accept it. He preferred king' s punishment to that of
God.
Ibnul Mobarak narrated about Abu Hanifa: Do you say of
that man who was given the treasures Gf the world but who fled
away from them.? Muhammad-b-Shuja narrated: Caliph Abul
Mansur ordered^OOO dirhams to be given to the Imam but he
declined the offer. On the day when the wealth would be
delivered to him, he covered his body with a cloth after prayer
and did not talk with anybody. The man of the Caliph went to
him with Dirhams but the Imam did not talk with him. One of the
people present said: This is his habit. Put it in a corner of his
room. This was done. Thereafter Abu Hanifa
left death
instruction with regard to this wealth and said to his son: When I
die and you finish my burial, take this purse to the Caliph and tell
him: This
is your
trust which you have deposited with Abu
Hanifa. His son said:
I did accordingly. The Caliph said: May
God have mercy on your father.
It is narrated that he was once offered the post of the chief
justice of the state, but he said: I am not fit for this post. When he
was asked about the reason, he said: If I have told the truth, it is
good for the post, and if I have told a lie, I am unfit for that post as
I am a liar.
Abu Hanifa's knowledge of the things of the hereafter and
his concern over the important matters of religion are proved by
the following narration. Ibn Juray said: I was informed that Abu
Hanifa was a great God fearing man. Sharik said: Abu Hanifa
used to spend long time in silence and meditation and converse
little with the people. These actions prove his exoteric
knowledge. He who has been given silence and asceticism has
been given all knowledge.
IMAM SHAFEYI
He was a devout worshipper. He divided the night into three
parts-one part for study, one part for prayer and one part for
sleep. The narrator said that Imam Shafeyi used to finish the
Quran 60 times in the month of Ramzan and every time he
finished
it in prayer. Hasan Qarabasi reported:
I spent many
nights with the great Imam. He used to spend one third of the
night in prayer and yet I have not seen him reciting more than
fifty to one hundred verses. At the end of each verse, he would

40
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
VoI-I
beseech God's mercy upon himself and upon all Muslims The
yea
a
rTas
a,
a fin
S
sto
"0
‘ L°T
f°°d With «•Sttttai for the last 16
years as a full stomach makes the body heavy, makes the heart
hard, mcreases sieep and renders a man lazy for worship He also
a,d ; Neyer have
I taken oath by God whether true or Wse He
?
e "2° C mmS that the ,0ve of the world and love ofGod are
umted m him is a |iar. Hudaidi said: Imam Shafeyi once went to
j s EenTrosto‘
yww '"T T
a"d the root of «ceHcism
evSE^'. Whoeyer loyes a thing keeps
it with him and
everythmg
is msigmficant to one to whoip the world
is
msignihcant This
is asceHcism which leads to God-fear. Once
tha
f
J hThad r
aha^^ ^ SV°°n before the Imam - He was told
that he had exp,red. He said: If he has died, the best man of his
bme has d^d. Omar-b-Nabatah said:
I have not found more
God-feanng man than Imam Shafeyi.
I, he and Hares-b-Labeed
went °ne day to the valley of Safa. Hares had a student with him
and he was a Qan or reader of the Quran. He had a sweet voice
they wfll nn^W ™S * *
°U Which they wil1 not sPeak an <*
;
h
!
yWl11 not be Slven permission to rise excuse-77:35, 1 saw that
|
colour of the fece of the Imam became changed and he was
trembling yehemently and then
fell
in swoon. When he
recovered he began to say: O God, I seek refuge to Thee from the
p ace of the liars and the scoffing of the heedless. O God
the
hearts of gnostics have submitted and the necks of those 'who
yearn for Thee bowed. O worshipped, bestow Thy bounty upon
m
!!
nde° ver
WltH Thy merCy ’ ForSive my faults throughtoe
grace of Thy countenance. Then he along with us left the place
ablutionTn^^l^l: ^ WaS ^ in Iraq *
1 was making
ablution m the bank of the river for prayer. A man then was
Pa
n
STS b
L
and Said: ° yOUng man ' make abJution well, God
wi
1 then treatgood with you both in this world and in the next. I
folIowed him. He looked at me and said: Have you got any
necessdy.
I said: Teach me something of what God has taught
y0
! K
He s
f
ld ' Know tbat he who knows God as true gets salvation
and he who fears h,s religion, remains safe from destruction He
who
remains ,ndifferent from the world, will be cool at seeine
the rewards which God will give him tomorrow. Shall I give you
Vol-I
KNOWLEDGE
41
more advice?
I said: Yes He said: The faith of one who has got
three characteristics is perfect-(l) to enjoin good to act according
to it, and (2) to prohibit evil and to desist from it, (3) and to guard
the limits of God. Shall
I give you more advice? I said: Yes. He
said: Adopt asceticism in the world, entertain hopes for the next
world and believe God in all your affairs, you will then be among
those who will get salvation. Then he went away. I asked: Who is
he? They said: Imam Shafeyi. Such fear and asceticism are the
result of nothing but for his knowledge of God and not for his
knowledge of legal questions like advapce paymept, loan, wages
etc. as are embodied in Fiqh.
Imam Shafeyi said: The knowledge of one who does not
make himseU perfect will come of no use to hiny He alsp said:
Whose confesses his obedience to God through the help of his
knowledge, his heart becon>es illumined. He also said: Every one
has got some persons who love him and some who hate him. If it
be so, be among those who obey God.
Abdul Qader-b-Abdul Aziz was a God-fearing man. He opce
aske^ Imam Shafeyi: Which of these virtues is better-patience,
trial and peace and mind (Tamkin)? The Imam replied: Peace of
mind is the rank of the Prophets and it is not attained except by
trial, and patience comes after
trial. Don't you see that God
• examined Abraham and then He gave him peace of mind? he
examined Solomon and thep gave him peace of mind and
kingdom. He did the same with Moses, Job, Joseph and others.
This reveals the deep knowledge of Imam Shaheyi about the
Quran. Sufyan Saori said: I or anybody has not seen like Shaieyi,
IMAM MALEK
He was adored with five qualities. Once he was asked: O
Malik, what do you say about search for knowledge? He replied:
It is fair and beautiful. If anybody does not separate from you
morning to evening, don't be separate from him. When the Imam
intended to narrate traditions, he used to make ablution, sit in the
middle of his bed, comb his beard, apply scent and then become
fearful and grave and then narrate traditions. When asked about
these formalities, he said:
I intend
to show honour
to
the
traditions of the Prophet. He said: Knowledge is light. God places
it wherever He wishes. Regarding the seeking of pleasure of God
by knowledge, he said: There is no benefit in arguments about

42
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
KNOWLEDGE
43
Vol-I
religion. This is proved by a saying of Imam Shafeyi who said:
Once
I was near Malek. He was asked about forty eight legal
questions: He replied regarding thirty two questions:
I don't
know. When the learned were mentioned, Imam Malek was
counted as a bright star. It is said that once the Caliph Mansur
prohibited him to narrate the particular tradition on the illegality
of divorce made under compulsion. The Caliph thereafter
instigated some one to question the Imam on the subject. He
declared among the people that divorce pronounced under
compulsion is notbinding. For this, the Caliph had him flogged.
The Caliph Harun Rashid once asked Imam Malek: Have you
got any house? He said: No. The Caliph then gave him 3000
dinars and said: Go and buy with this money a house. The Imam
accepted the money but did not spend it for the purpose. When
the Caliph intended to return to Baghdad he asked Malek: You
should come along with us, because we have decided to make the
people follow 'Mualta' as Osman made them follow the Quran.
Malek
said: This
is not the way
to make the people follow
'Mualta' because the companions of the Prophet after his death
dispersed around the different countries and they related the
traditions in each place. Further the Prophet said: Difference of
opinion among the people is a blessing. As for my going with
you, there is no way as the Prophet said: Had they known, they
would Tiave known that Medina is best for them again he said:
Medina removes its corruption just as the furnace removes the
dross of iron. Therefore here are your dinars.
If you like, take
them back and if you like, you may leave them. Does this mean
that you ask me to leave Medina in return for what you have
given me? I prefer nothing more than the city of the Messenger of
God,noteven the whole world.
1
Such was the asceticism of Malek. When as a result of his
diffusion of knowledge and the spreading of his companions,
large wealth began to come to him from different corners of the
earth, he used to distribute them in charity. Such an ascetic was
Soloman despite his royal
glory. Another example of his
asceticism is that Imam Shafeyi once said: I noticed a number of
Khorasani horses at the door of Malek.
I have never seen any
other horse better than them. I said to Malek: How beautiful are
they! He said: They are then presents from me to you.
I said to
him: Keep one of them for yourself for riding. He said: I shall be
Vol-I
ashamed before God to tread with the hoof of any least of burden
the soil wherein lies His Prophet. See therefore his benevo!ence
and his veneration for the soil of Medinah.
There is yet another report of his asceticism. He said: I once
went to the Caliph Harun Rashid. he asked Malek: O Abu
Abdullah, you should come frequently to my place, so that I may
learn from you 'Muatta'. He said: May God exalt my master. This
knowledge has come from you.
If you honour
it,
it will be
exalted; and if you dishonour it, it will be despised. Knowledge is
.something you shall learn and not something you should recei ve.
Then the Caliph said: You are right. He said to his sons: Go
out to the mosque and acquire from him knowledge along with
the people.
Imam Ahmad and Sufiyan Saori had many followers.
Nevertheless they are known for asceticism and God fear. All
books contain their sayings and stories of their asceticism.
Now examine the lives of the Imams and serutinize those
who claim
to be their followers. Did the Imams rise to such
eminence only for their knowledge of Fiqh which now means
contracts of the type of salam, hire, rental, lease and other
worldly laws?
SECTION 3
BLAMEWORTHY SCIENCES
Knowledge is not held to be blameworthy except for one of
three reasons. Firstly, if it leads to the harm of another, it becomes
blameworthy, such as magic, talisman, sorcery. These sciences
are true no doubt as the Quran testifies. The Sahihs Bukhari and
Muslim narrate traditions also that the Prophet of God was once
victim of sorcery
for which he
fell
ill. Gebriel informed
the
Prophet of this matter. The enchantment was taken out from
underneath a stone in
the bottom of a
well.
It
is a kind
of
knowledge obtained through the learned men of the precious
stones and mathematical calculations of the places and times of
the risingof stars.
(2) The second reason is that if a science causes much harm to
the acquner, it is blameworthy, such as the science of Astronomy
It is of two kinds, once coals with Mathematics and is connected

44
THE POOK OF WORSHIP
VoI-I
[
with accounts. The Quran says: The sun and the moon have got
courses reckoned-55: 4 It says again: As for the moon, I decreed
stations for
it
till
it changes
like an old and crooked palm
branch-36:39. The second kind deals with Astrology, the gist of
which
is
that the future events are indicated by the present
causes. Astrology is therefor an attempt to know the course of the
laws and ordinances of God in connection with His creations.
The Sharia has declared
it as blameworthy. The Prophet said:
Whenever Taqdir is mentioned, remain silent and whenever my
companions are mentioned, remain silent. The Prophet said: I
fear three things for my foIlowers after me, the oppression of the
leaders, faith in Astrology and disbelief in Taqdir (predecree).
Hazrat Omar said: Learn Astrology, to conduct you in land and
se?a and not more. There are three causes for this prohibition.
Pirstly, it is harmful for majority of the people, because thoughts
occur in their minds that it js the stars which influence the course
of events and so the stars are (o be worshipped. The wise man
knows that the sun, the moon and the stars are subjects to the
commands of God. The second reason is thaf Astrology is purely
guess work.
It has been termed blameworthy because
it
command
is that of only ignorance. Once the Prophet was
passing by a man surrounded by the people. He asked: Who is
this man? They said: He is a great leamed man. The Prophet
asked: Of what learning? They said: Of poetry and Arab
geneology. The Prophet said: Such a learning which does not do
any benefit and such ignorance which does not do any harin. The
Prophet said: Learning is of decisive verses or lasting usages (of
Prophet) and just ordinances (based on the Quran and Sunnah).
It appears from this that discussion about Astrology and the like
sciences are useless undertakings.
(3) The third reason that this science is blameworthy is that it
becomes of no use to one who acquires it, for example, leaming of
trivial sciences before the important ones learning of subtleties
before fundamentals, Ignorance, however, in some cases
is
beneficial as is seen from the fo!lowing story.
A certain person once complained to a physician that his wife
was sterile and that she bore no children. The physician left the
pulse of the woman and told her that she would die after 40 days.
The woman got extremely frightened and gave away
all her
wealth and lived these forty days without food and drink. After
l
Vol-I
KNOWLEDGE
45
the period, her husband came to the physician and said that his
wife did not die. The physician said: Now cobabit with hei’ aiid
you will get an issue. He asked: How will it pe? The physician
siid:
I saw that the woman was too fat and that grease was
blocking her uterus and that it could not be removed except by
fear of death. Then she became lean and fit for conception. It is
gathered from
this story that ignorance
is sometimes good.
Ignorance of some branches of knowledge is good and it will be
clear from the following Hadis of the Holy Prophet. He said: I
seek refuge to God from useless knowledge.
So don't discuss about those leaming which have been
declared by Shariat as useless. There are many things which, if
inquired into, will do harm.
SECOND MATTER
CHANGE OF THE MEANINGS OF SOME WORDS
CONNECTED WITH KNOWLEDGE.
The people have changed the original meanings of the words
Fiqh, Ilm, Tauhid, Tazkir and Hekmat and have given them the
meanings of their own. As a
result, they have become now
blameworthy.
FIQH (religious learning).
It has now the meaning of the
science of unusual legal cases, mystery of the minutest details of
jurispmdence and excessive debates on them. The man who
gives attention
to such a science
is called now Faqih or
jurisprudent. In the first century, it had a different meaning. It
was a science of the path of the hereafter and knowledge of thb
benericial and harmful matters of soul, knowledge of the
meanings of the Quran and.the domination of God fear over the
heart. This is proved by the words of God in the following verse
that they may be expert in religion and may wam their people
when they come back to them-9:193. Fiqh or jurisprudence is that
which gives such a warning and fear rather than the details of
divorce, manumission, rental etc. God says: They have got hearts
but they do not understand therewith-2:178. Those who were
presentbefore tHe Prophet did not know the details of laws.
Someone asked Sa'ad-b-Ibrahim: Who is the greatest Faqih in
Medina? He said: He who fears God most. This points out to the
result of Fiqh. The Prophet once said: Shall
I not inform you

46
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
KNOWLEDGE
47
Vol-I
about a perlect Faqih? The companions said: Yes. He said: a
pertect Faqih is one who does not deprive the people of the mercy
of God, does not give hope of freedom from punishment, nor
makes them lose hope of His mercy, nor discards the Quran in
favour of something
else. When Anas-b-Malek narrated the
fol!owing tradition-To sit with those who remember God from
dawn to sun- rise is dearer to me than the manumission of four
slaves', the Prophet said: A man cannot become a perfect Faqih
unless he makes the people understand about the existence of
God and believes that there are several objects in the Quran.
Hazrat Hasan Basari said: A Faqih is one who renunciates the
world, remains steadfast to the hereafter, is wise in his religion
worships his Lord constantly, restrains himself from attacks on
the reputation of his fellow Muslims,
is indifferent
to their
wealth and wishes good of the Muslim world. He did not say.
One who commits to memory the intricacies of law is Faqih.
ILM is the science of religion, the science of the knowledge of
God and His verses. When the Caliph Omar died, Hazrat Ibn
Masud exclaimed: Nine-tenths of the science of religion have
passed away. The present people used the term Ilm to mean the
science of those who can well debate the cases of jurisprudence
with their adversaries and those who cannot do that are termed
weak and outside the category of the learned men. But what has
been said about the excellence of learning and the merits of the
learned men apply to those who are versed according to the
former meaning.
TAUHID (unity of God). The present meaning of Tauhid is
scholastic theology or Ilm Kalam, the knowledge of the
methods of argumentation,
the manner of confronting
adversaries. Tauhid was then the belief that all things come
from God and
it ruled out all intermediary causes, the belief
that good and evil all come from God and that the result of
Tauihid
is God-reliance. Such people believed that another
fruit of Tauhid is to avoid complaints to the people, not to get
angry at them and to remain satisfied with the decree of God.
Another fruit of Tauhid is the saying of Hazrat Abu Bakr in his
illness. The people said to him: Let us call a physician for you.
He said: The Physician Himself has given me this disease
In
another narration, he said: The Physician said:
I certainly do
what I wish-II:109, 85:16Q.
7
Vol-I
Tauhid is therefore a precious fruit which is engaged into
several husks, the outer husk
is distant from the inner. The
modem people have taken up the husk and given up the pith.
The people have termed it as the science of husk and given up the
science of pith. The meaning of the husk of Tauhid is to utter by
tongue There is no deity but God'. It is opposite to Trinity of the
Christians. The hypocrite Muslims also utter
it. The pith of
Tauhid is confirmation by heart what the tongue confesses. The
heart believes it to be true. This is real Tauhid which is to entmst
every affairs of man to God in such a way that his attention is not
diverted to any other matter except to God. Those who follow
their passion do not conform to this monotheism.
God says: Have you seen such one who takes his passion as
God-25: 43Q?. The Prophet said: The worst deity in the sight of
God that is worshipped in the world is the deity of passion.
Idol worship is also done according to the wishes of passion.
For this reason, the soul of such a man inclines towards the
religion of his ancestors. Such a man is like one who rises up in
the morning and says facing the Ka'ba: I have turned my face
towards One who created the heavens and the earth, but he
really does not turn his heart towards God and begins the day
with a
lie. The direction of the Ka'ba is not the direction of
God. He who turns his face towards the Ka'ba can't be called to
have turned his face towards God as God
is not confined
within space and direction. Mind is the mine of Tauhid and its
fountainhead. A man of Tauhid turns his mind towards God
and not towards any other direction.
ZIKR OR TAZKIR (God's Remembrance).
This
is the
science of invocation and admonition. God says: Remind them
because Zikr or admonition benefits the believers-51:55Q. There
are many traditions regarding the merits of the assemblies of
Zikr. The Prophet said: When you pass by the garden of paradise,
enjoy yourselves. He was asked: What are the gardens of
Paradise? He said: Assemblies of Zikr (remembrance of God).
The Prophet said: The angels of God roam in the horizon except
the angels of creation. When they see any assembly of Zikr, they
accost themselves and say: Come unto your goals. They then
come to the place, surround them and hear them, remember God
and take lessons. Now the assembly of Zikr means the assembly
of lectures wherein the modern lecturers deliver long speeches,

48
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
KNOWLEDGE
49
Vol-I
tell stories, recite poems and poehies and sing songs. Such was
not the practice at the time of the tourrightly guided Caliphs.
Story-telling is an innovation. Ibn Omar once came out of the
mosque exclaiming: None has sent me out except a story-teller.
f
Hazrat Ali turned out the story tellers from the congregational
|
mosque of Basra. He did not tum out Hasan Basari as he used to
deal with the hereafter, contemplation of death, defects of soul,
\
machinations of the devil. Such is the assembly about which the
Prophet said: To be present at the assembly of Zikr is better than
(
one thousand rak'ats of prayers, visiting one thousand sick men
|
and attending one thousand funerals. Hazrat Ata said: One
f
assembly of Zikr expiates the sins of seventy assemblies of
useless talks. The Prophet once heard three talks from Abdullah-
b-Rawahah and said: O Abu Rawahah, keep yourself far from
omamental talks. He asked the Prophet one day about the blood
money of a child which died in the womb of its mother saying:
I
How shall we pay the blood wit of a child who has taken no food,
no drink, nor cried, nor breathed. Such murder is excusable. The
Prophet said: are you
like the desert Arabs who indulge in
ornamental words?
POETRY: As to poetry, its general use in sermons is bad. God
says: As to poets, those who go astray follow them. Don't you
find the wondering in every valley and say what they do not
do-26 255? God said: I did not teach him (Prophet) poetry, nor it
is becoming of him. Furthermore what is narrated of poetries is
sermons comprises mostly of love episodes, descriptions of the
\
beauties of the beloved> the joys of union and pangs of
separation. This gives arise to lust and sexual passion more than
religious enthusiasm. There are however such poetries which
contain wisdom. The prophet also said: There
is wisdom in
poetry.
HIKMAT: The word Hakim derived from the word Hikmat
is now used in the case of physicians, astrologers and those who
tell the future of the people by examining hands, but God says
about the word Hikmat (wisdom): He gives wisdom whom He
wishes Whoever has been given wisdom has been given a great
good-2:272Q. The Prophet said:
If a man learns a word of
wisdorn, it is better than the wotld and what it contains. Now
think what was Hikmat and what it has come to. Now think also
of the meanirig of many words which have come down to us. One
Vol-I
day a man asked the Prophet: Who
is the worst creature in
creation? The Prophet said: O God, pardon me. On being
repeatedly asked, the Prophet replied: They are wicked leamed
men.
Now you have come to know about praiseworthy and
blameworthy sciences and how the intermingled with one
another. Now chose either of the two. If you want good, you may
follow the path of the ancient sages and saints, and if you want,
you may follow the paths of the
latter generations. All
knowledge which the ancient sages loved have vanished. The
Prophet said: Islam began with a few and it will soon return to a
few as it began. Good nes to those few. He was asked: Who are
those few? He said: Those who purify my Sunnah after the
people polluted them and those who revive my sunnah after
their death. In another narration: The few are a few righteous
people in the midst of many unrighteous men.
THIRD MATTER
HOW MUCH IS PRAISEWORTHY OF
THE PRAISEWORTHY SCIENCES?
Knowledge
is divided into three parts. One part
is
blameworthy in whole or in part, one part is praiseworthy in
whole or in part and one part is praiseworthy upto a certain limit
and beyond that
it is blameworthy. Look to the condition of
physique. A little of health and beauty is good, but a little of ugly
figure and bad conduct is bad: Moderate expense of wealth is
praiseworthy but immoderate expense is blameworthy
(1) The knowledge of which a little or much is blameworthy
has got no benefit either in this world or.in the next, because,
there
is such harm in
it which
is greater than
its benefit, for
example magic, astrology or talismnics. A valuable life should
not be spent uselessly but there are some sciences which have got
moderate benefits, but their harms are greater.
(2) The science which
is beneficial up to the end
is the
science of knowing God, His attributes and His works. His laws
affecting this world and the hereafter. This is the sdence which is
sought for its own attributes and by which the blessings of the
hereafter
is gained. To exert oneself to the utmost of one"s

50
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
KNOWLEDGE
51
capacity to gain it falls far short of what is required, because it is
such a sea of which the depth is unlimited. Those who search it
are remaining constantly in its shores and edges. The Prophet,
the saints and the learned with faith according to their different
ranks, power and streng^i and according to the decree of God
could not even navigate its ends. This is the hidden science which
can never be recorded in books. For it, precaution shall have to be
taken, efforts shall have to be made and the condition of the
leamed men of the hereafter shall have to be examined. For this
science, a great deal of efforts, purification of mind, renunciaHon
of theworld and the following of the Prophets and friends ofGod
are necessary. He who does all these things eams it according to
his fate and not to his efforts, but there is no escape from efforts as
efforts are the only keys of guidance and there is no otherkey.
(3) The sciences which are praiseworthy up to a certain limit
are those which have been narrated at the time of discussion of
Farze-Kafayah. Each has got three limits-first limit up
to
necessity, second up to moderation and third up to excessive
quantity and there is no end of it during life. Beware of the two
persons. Either be busy with yourself or be busy atter finishing
your work with others. Be careful of correcting others before you
correct yourself.
If you keep busy with yourself, be busy with
acquisition of knowledge which is compulsory according to your
need, for instance, knowledge of open deeds such as prayer, fast
etc. More importance however is the science which everybody
neglects, It is the science of heart. Know which of these sciences
are bad and which are good as there is nobody who is safe from
envy, hatred, pride,
self-conceit and such other destructive
faults. Performance of these outward deeds is like the extemal
application of ointment to the body when
it
is stricken with
scabies and boils while neglecting to remove the pus by means of
surgery. The leamed men lay stress upon the outward actions
and the learned men of the hereafter remove the impurities of
mind.
So you should not engage yourself in Farze Kefayah duties
till you are pure in heart and acquire stj*ength to give up open and
secret sins. Give attention first to the Holy Quran, then to the
Sunnah of the Holy Prophet, then to Tafsirs of the learned men
and then to other learnings. Don't engage your life to the learning
of only one branch of education as life is short but the learnings
Vol-I
are many. The acquisition of these learnings are weapons for the
hereafter. There
is no learning which has got no limits of
necessity, moderation and perfection. This is applicable also to
Hadis, Tafsir and Fiqh.
A certain saint asked a learned man in dream: Tell me the
condition of learning about which you held disputation. He said:
It has all vanished like scattered dust, Only two rak'ats of prayer
at the latter part of night has done me benefit. The Prophet said:
No people are misguided after guidance except disputation.
Then he read the following verse: They did nothing about you
but disputation. Rather they are a contentions people. About a
verse-'But they in whose hearts there
is perversity'(3:5:) the
Prophet said that they are a contentious people abput whom God
said: Beware of them. The Prophet said: You are living in an age
when you receive inspiration for actions but soon a people will
appear who will be given to disputation. The worst men to God
in creation are given to bitter disputes. He also said: Those who
has been given to disputation have notbeen given actions.
SECTION-4
HARMS OF THE SCIENCE OF POLEMICS AND EVILS
OF DEBATES AND DISPUTATIONS.
Know,O dear readers, that after the Prophet, the rightly-guided
Caliphs were the leaders of the leamed in the science of God. They
were the eyes of knowledge and were experienced in the legal
decisions. They did not take the help of jurisprudents except in
cases where consultation was necessary. They decided on the
strength of Ijtihad and their dedsions were recorded in their lives.
After their death, Caliphate went to those who were not so
experienced in legal matters and administrative affairs. They were
compelled to seek the aid of jurisprudents. At that time, a band of
Tabeyins (successors of companions) were alive and they persisted
in following
strictly the injunctions of religion. Whenever the
Caliphs called them, they fled. But some leamed men used to mix
with the Caliphs and consequently became humiliated. Therefore
there were differences of opinions among the leamed men and
there grew different Mazhabs or sects as a result. There were
argumentations and disputations over the intricate questions of
religion. They composed also many works on these subjects. This
induced the people to take the controversies and disputations.

52
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
Vol-I
KNOWLEDGE
53
THERE ARE EIGHT CONDITIONS
OF DEBATES
(1) The first condition is that where debate for search of truth
is one of Farze Kefayah duties, one who has not already fulfilled
his part in duties of Farze Ain should not engage himself in the
debates even for searching truth.
(2) The second condition
is that one should not consider
debates more important than Farze-Kefayah duties.
He commits sin who does other works leaving aside a more
important Farze Kefayah duty. He is like a man who does not
give water to drink to people who are thirsty and facing death
even though he has got power to do so, beacause he remains then
busy in giving lesson of cupping. Once the Prophet was asked
:
When will the people give up enjoining good and fobidding evil?
The Prophet said
: When flattery will grow in good people among
you, kingdom will go to the meanest of you and theology to those
who will be corrupt.
(3) The third condition which justifies debate is that the debater
should have ability and give decision on his own responsiblility
without referring to the opinion of Imam Abu Hanfia or any other
Imams. He who has not the ability of independent interpretation
should not express his opinion but should refer it to an Imam.
(4) The fourth condition which justifies debatejs that the
subject for decision should be about actual cases that crop up, for
example, the question of inheritance and not about future cases.
The companions also held consutations as
questions arose or
were likely to arise in order to arrive at truth.
(5) The fifth condition is that debate should be held in priavte
in preference to open meetings in presence of noted people and
in grandeur because privacy is more suitable for dear thinking
and to examine what is right and what is wrong.
(6) The sixth condition is that the debater should like truth in
the same spirit as a lost thing is searched for. He should not mind
weather the truth is found by him or by his adversery. when
Hazrat Omar was once giving sermon, a woman pointed out to
him his mistake to which he submitted. At another time, Hazrat
Ali was asked a question by a man and he replied. When the man
pointed cut his mistake, he admitted it.
Vol-I
(7) The seventh condition
is that the debater should not
prevent his adversary from giving up one argument in favour of
another and one illustration in favour of another.
(8) The eighth condition is that debate should be held with
such person from whom benefit is derived and who is leamed.
From these eight conditions, you will be able to distinguish
those who debate for the sake of God and those who debate for
other purposes.
THIRD MATTER-EVILS OF DEBATES
The following evils arise out ofmodem debates.
(1) ENVY: The Prophet said
: Envy consumes good deeds as
fire consumes
fuels. A debater
is never free from envy and
hatred. Envy
is a burning
fire. One who
falls in
it gets
punishement in the world. Hazrat Ibn Abbas said
: Acquire
knowledge wherever it is found and don't obey the devils who
are prone to disputes.
(2) PRIDE: The Prophet said
: A believer cannot have pride in
him. There is 'a'Hadis Qudsi in which God said
: Grandeur is My
cloak and pride
is My mantle.
I destory one who snatches
anything of these two from Me.
(3) RANCOUR: A debater is seldom free from the evil of
rancour. The Propherr said
: A believer has got no rancour.
(4) BACK-BITING which is likened by God to the eating of
carrion (49:12). A debater ascribes to his oppoinent foolishness,
ignorance and stupidity.
(5) DECLARATION OF SELF-PURITY. God says
: Don't
attribute purity ot yourself. He knows best who fears Him (53:33).
(6) SPYING and prying into the secrets of adversary. God
says
: Pry not (49:12).
(7) H^POCRISY. A debater expresses his friendship for his
adversary outwardly but he cherishes hatred for him inwardly.
The Prophet said: When the leamed men do not translate their
leaming into action, when they profess love for one another with
their tongue and nurse hatred in their hearts, when they sever the

54
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
KNOWLEDGE
55
Vol-I
ties of reiationship, God sends curse upon them, makes their
tongues mute and their eyes blind.
(8) TO TURN AWAY FROM TRUTH. The most hateful
thing to a debater is to reject the truth reveaied to his adversary
and thus he takes
to deception and deceit. The Prophet
prohibited dispute about useless things. He said
: If a man gives
up disputation in matters of unlawful things, a garden will be
built for him in paradise. If a man gives up desputation in matters
of truth, a house will be built up for him in the highest paradise.
God said
: He is more wrongfuI than
one who devises a lie
against God and calls the truth a lie when it comes to him 29:68.
God said
: Who is more wrongful that he who lies against God
and treats the truth when it comes to him as a lie-39:33 ?
(9) ANOTHER FAULT OF DEBATE IS SHOW AND
FLATTERING the people in an effort*to win their favour and to
nislead them. Hypocrisy is the greatest disease with which a
debater is attacked and it is a major sin.
(10) DECEPTION. Debators and compelled to deception.
These ten evils are the secret major sins arising out of debates
and disputations. Besides these major offences, there arise many
other guilts out of controversies leading to blows, kicks, boxing,
tearing of garments etc.
The Iearned men are of three classes. One class comprise
those who ruin themselves and also ruin others. Another class
make themselves fortunate and make other also fortunate. Such
learned men call others towards good. The third class learned
men call ruin to themselves but make others fortunate.
SECTION 5
Manners to be observed by teachers and students. These
manners comprise ten duties.
(1)
The first duty of a student is to keep himself free from
impure habit and evil matters. Effort to acquire knowledge is the
worship of mind. It purifies secret faults and takes to God. Prayer
is observed by outward organs and as outward purity
is not
gained except by outward organs, so worship by mind, the
fountain head of acquisition of knowledge, cannot be attained
without the removal of bad habits and evil attributes. The
|
Vol-I
Prophet said
: Religion is founded on cleanliness. So outward
and inward purities are necessary. God sys
: The polytheists are
impure
9: 28Q.
It
is understood from
this that purity and
impurity are not merely extemal as the polytheists alSo keep
their dresses clean and bodies clean, but as their mind is impure,
so they ar generally impure. The inward purity is of greatest
j
importance. The Prophet therefore said
: Angels do not enter a
t
house wherein there are dogs. Human mind is a
house, the
abode of angels, the place of their movements The blameworthy
evils like anger, lust, rancour, envy, pride, conceit and the like are
dogs. When dogs reside in a heart, where is the place for the
j
angels? God takes the secrets of knowledge to the hearts throught
j
the angels. They do not take it except to the pure souls. Hazrat
Ibn Masud said
: Knowledge
is not acquired through much
[
leaming. It is a light cast in heart. A certain sage said
: Knowledge
!
is God-fear as God said
: The learned among the people fear God
|
most.
(2) The second duty of a student is to reduce his worldly
I
affairs and keep aloof
: from kith and kin as acquisition of
knowledge is not possible in these environments. For this reason,
a certain sage said
: God has not gifted two minds to a man. For
this reason, a certain sage said
: Knowledge will not give you its
full share till you surrender your entire mind to it.
(3) The third duty of a student is not to take pride or exalt
himself over the teacher but rather entrust to him the conduct of
all his affairs and submit to his advices as a patient submits to his
physician. The Prophet said
: It is the habit of a believer not
to
flatter anyone except when he seeks knowledge. Therefore a
student should not take pride over his teacher. Knowledge
cannot be acquirred except through modesty and humility. God
said
: Herein there is warning for one who has got a heart or sets
up ear while he himself being a witness-50:36. The meaning of
having a heart is to be fit for receiving knowledge and one who is
prepared and capable of understanding knowledge. Whatever
the teacher should recommend to the student, the latter should
follow
it putting aside his own opinion. The people should
question only in the matter which the teacher permits him. Here
there is an instance of Moses and Khizir Khizir said
: You will not
ask me anything I do. Still Moses questioned him and for that he
separated him.

56
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
VoI-I
atfenHnn
h
tn°.^
th/«
ty °f 3 student is tha ‘ he should first pay no
nf ti
5> T
!'e/‘fth
,
d
I
Ut>
;
is thata sKtdent should not miss any branch
of knowledge. He should hy to become perfect in them as ail
anl"d with o heis'»
h6lP T
an°ther and SOme branches ace
a lied with others. If a man does not get a things, it becomes his
enemy. God says
: When they do not find guidance they say
it is
an age-loug lie 46:10 A poet said
: A sweet thing is bSer fn the
mouth of a pahent as sweet water is tasteless to a sick man. Good
God^r
e
hPln
1S
h
aCqU,re
K
aCC°rding to one,s genius - It leads man to
Gud or helps him in that way. Each branch of knowledge has eot
mnH^Thad
6
E
h
°h
8
h
UardS * *
a *Uard -ho Patcuis the
ontiers mjihad. Each has got a rank in it and each has eot a
rewardin the hereafter according to his rank. The only condition
to p>lease God^
& ***** ^ aCquisition of knovvledge should be
(6) The sixth duty of a student is that he should not take ud all
branches of knowledge at a time, but should take up the most
mportant one at first as life is not sufficient for all branches of
knowJedge A httle learing if acquired with enthusiasm perfects
the knowledge of the hereafter or the sciences
of the worldly
usages and the sciences of reyelation. The object of the science of
worldly usages is to acquire spiritual knowledge. The goal of the
spintual knowledge
is
to know God. Our obje<ft by
this
knowledge
is not that belief which
is handed down from
generahons to generations. Our object for this knowledge is to
s«ht anSmg °ut of certain faith whieh God casts in soul.
S
K
h
4 ASu
«
acquired by Hazrat Abu Bakr. The Prophet said
ab
?h!i^
b
r
U B
u
kr;' ^ the faith 0f the PeoP,e of the world is weighed
with the faith of Abu Bakr, his faith would be heavy. In short the
lghest and the noblest of all science, is to know God This science
,Shke 3 Sea ° f V
T
hich the dePth cannot be ascertained. In this
science, the
highest rank is that of the Prophets, then of the
fnends of God and finally that of those who foIIow them. It has
been narrated that the portraits of two ancient wise men were
seen on the wall of a mosque. One of them held a peice of paper in
which it was wntten: If you purify everything/ don'tunderstand
Vol-I
KNOWLEDGE
57
f
that y°u have even purified one thing
till you know God and
know
that He
is
the cause of all Causes and the Creator of
everything. In the hand of the second man, there was a scroll in
which it was writen
: I removed thirst before by drinking water
and then
I have come to know God. But when
I have come to
know God, my thirst was quenched without any water.
[
(7) The seventh duty of a student is that he should not take up
a new branch of learning
till he has leamt fully the previous
branch of learning, because it is requisite for the acquisition of
knowledge. One branch of knowledge
is a guide
to another
branch. God says
: Whoso has been given the Quran recities it
with due recitation-2:15 In other words, he does not take up one
learning till he masters the previous one. Hazrat Ali said
: Dont't
onceal truth form men, rather know the truth, then you will be
» "te master of truths.
(8) The eighth duty of a studnet is to know the causes for
which noble sciences are known.
It can be known from two
things, nobility of its fruit and the anthenticity of its principles.
Take for example the science of religion as medicine. The fruit of
the science of religion is to gain an eternal life and the fruit of the
other is to gain a temporary Iife. From these points of view. the
science of religion is more noble as its result is more noble. Take
up Mathematics and Astrology, the former is nobler because the
former is more authentic in its foundations. From this, it is clear
that the science of the knowledge of God, of His angels, of His
books and of His prophets is the noblest and also the branches of
knowledge which help it.
(9) The ninth duty of a student is to purify mind and action
with virtues, to gain proximity to God and His angles and to live
in the company of those who live near Him. His aim should not
be to gain worldly matters, to acquire riches and properties, to
argue with the illiterate and to show pride and haughtiness. He
whose object is to gain nearness of God should seek such learning
as helps towards that goal, namely the knowjedge of the
hereaafter and the leamings which are auxiliary to it. God said
:
God will raise herewith in rank who are believers and to whom
knowledge have been given-58:ll. God said
: They have got
stages, some lower, some higher. The highest rank is that of the
Prophets, then of the friends of God and then of the learned who
are firm in knowledge and then of the pious who follow them.

58
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
KNOWLEDGE
59
Vol-I
(10) The tenth duty of a student
is that he should keep
attention to the primary object of knowledge. It is not in your
power to enjoy bliss of this world and that of the next world
together. This world is a temprory abode. Body is a convevance
and the actions run towars the goal. The goal is God and nothing
else. All bliss and happines lie in Him. So give more importance
to the sciences which take to that ultimate goal.
There are three kinds of leamings.
(1) One kind of learning is like the purchase of commodities
in journey. They are the sciences of medicine, laws (Fiqh) and all
other sciences which keep connection with the welfare of the
people in the world.
(2) Another class of learning is like the science of travelling in
the desert and surmounting obstacles. They purify the mind
from evil traits and take it to a high place that does not fall to the
Iot of any except to those whom God shows favour.
(3) The third kind of knoweldge
is like the knowledge of
pilgrimage and its mles and regulations. This is the science of
knowledge of God, His attitutes and the knowldge of the actions
of angels. This is the knowledge which can not be gained except
by the agnostics who are close to Him. Those who are lower in
rank than them will get also salvation. God says
: As for one who
is of those nearest to God, there is happiness, bounty and garden
of bliss for him. But as for one who is of the companions of the
right hand there is peace for him-56:87. This is a certain truth
which they perceived through contemplations. This is more clear
than £eeing with eyes. They are confirmed in their faith after
seeing for themselves. Others are like those who have got faith
but without contemplation and without seeing with their own
eyes.
By the soul,
I don
r
t mean heart made up of flesh but it is a
subtle Sir or secret essence which the bodily senses
fail
to
perceive.
It
is a
spiritual substance from God and has been
described sometimes by Nafs, sometimes by Qalb. The material
heart is the vehicle for the spiritual essence to remove the veil
from it as it belongs to the science of revelation, a sceince which is
withheld from men and there is no permission to discuss it. What
is permissible is the discussion that it is a precious jewel and
belongs to the world of spirit and not to the world of matter. God
Vo!-I
says
: They ask you about soul. Say
: Soul proceeds from the
command of my Lord-17:87. The connection of soul with God is
nobler than that of
all the bodily limbs. To God belong the
creation and the command
is the most precious thing which can
carry the trust of God. It is nobler than the heaven and the earth
and what they contain as the latter refused to bear the trust out of
fear of the spiritual world. It has come from God and it will return to
God. It is the spiritual substance which drives towards God.
SECOND SUBJECT-DUTIES OF A TEACHER
A man has got four conditions in relation to wealth. A
wealthy man at first produces commodities. Secondly he hoards
his productions and does not seek the aid of others, Thirdly, he
spends
it for himself and rests satisfied with
it. Pourthly, he
spends there from for another to get honour. The last is the best.
Similar are the conditions of knowledge.
It
is acquired like
wealth and has got four conditions. - (1) condition of acquisition
of knowledge, (2) condition after acquisition of knowledge, (3)
condition wherein he will contemplate and enjoy his
achievement and
(4) condition wherein he would impart his
knowledge to others and this last condition is the best. He who
acquires knowledge and acts up to it and teaches it to the people
is noble to the angels of heaven and earth. He is like the sun
which illumines itself and gives light to other things. Such a man
is like a pot of musk which is full of fragance and gives fragrance
to others. He who teaches knowledge
to others but does not
himself act up to it is like a note-book which dos not benefit
itself but benefits others or like an instrument which gives edge
to iron but itself has got no edge, or like a needle which remains
naked but sews clothing for others, or like a lamp which gives
light to other things but itself burns.
A poetsaid :-
"Knowledge without action is like a glowing wick,
it gives light to others but itself dies burning.
Whoever takes up the profession of teaching should observe
the following duties :-
(1) He will show kindness and sympatty to the students and
treat them as his own children. The Prophet said
:
'I am to you
like a father to his son/ His object should be to protect the student

60
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
Vol-I
from the fire of Hell. As parents save their children from the fire
of this world, so a teacher should save his students or disciples
from the fire of Hell. The duties of a teacher are more that those
of parents. A father is the immediate cause of this transient life,
but a teacher is the cause of immortal
life.
It is because of the
spiritual teacher that the hereafter
is much remembered. By
teacher, I mean the teacher of the sciences of the hereafter or the
sciences of the world with the object of the hereafter. A teacher
ruins himself and also his students if he teaches for the sake of the
world. For this reason, the people of the hereafter are journeyine
towards the next world and to God and remain absent from the
. The monttls and years of this world are so many stations
of their joumey. There is no miserliness in the fortunes of the nxet
world and so there
is no envy among them. They turn to the
verse: "The believers are brethren"-49:10.
(2) The second duty of a teacher is to foIlow the usages and
ways of the Prophet.
In other words, he should not seek
remuneration for teaching but nearness
to God therefor. God
instructs us to say
: Say, I don't want any remuneration for this
from
y°u-9:3 l. Wealth and property are the servants of body
wh.ch is the vehicle of soul of which the essence is knowledge
and for which there is honour of soul. He who searches wealth in
heu of knowledge is like one who has got his face besmeared with
lmpurities but wants to cleanse his body. In that case, the master
is made a servant and the servant a master.
.
The
thir<
? duty of a teacher
is that he should not
withhold rrom his students any advice. After he finishes the
outword sciences, he should teach them the inward sciences.
He should
tell them that the object of education
is to eain
nearness of God, not power or richnes and that God created
ambition as a means of perpetuating knowledge which
is
essential for these sciences.
(4)
The fourth duty of a teacher is to dissuade his students
from evil ways with care and caution, with sympathy and not
with rebuke and harshness, because*in that case it destroys the
veil of awe and encourages disobedience. The Holy Prophet is
the guide of all teachers. He said
: If men had been forbidden to
makepamdge of camePs dung, they would have done it saying
that they would not have been forbidden to do it unless there has
been some good in it/
Vol-I
KNOWLEDGE
61
(5) The fifth duty of a teacher is that he shall not belittle the
value of other sciences before his students. He who teaches
grammer naturally thinks the science of jurisprudence as bad
and he who teaches jurisprudence discourages the science of
traditions and so on. Such evils are blameworthy. In fact the
teacher of one learning should prepare his students for study of
other learnings and then he should observe the rules of gradual
progress from one stage to another.
(6) The sixt duty that a teacher should do is to teach his
students up to the power of their understanding. The students
\
should not be taught such things as are beyond the capacity of
their understanding. In
this matter, he should follow the
Prophet who said
: We prophets form one class. We have
been commanded to give every man his rightful place and to
speak to men according to their intellect. The Prophet said
:
When a man speaks such a word to a people who cannot grasp
it with their intellect,
it becomes a danger to some persons.
Hazrat Ali said pointing out to his breast
: 'There
is much
|
knowledge in
it, but then there should be some people to
understand
it. The hearts of pious men are graves of secret
matter/ From this, it is understood that whatever the teacher
[
knows should not all be communicated to the students at the
same time. Jesus Christ said
: Don't hang pearls around the
neck of a swine. Wisome is better than pearls. He who knows it
as bad
is worse than swine. Once a learned man was
questioned about something but he gave no reply. The
questioner said
: Have you not heard that the Prophet said?-
He who conceals any useful knowledge
will on the
Resurrection Day be bridled with a bridle of fire." The learned
man said
: You may place the bridle of fire and go.
If I don't disclose it to one who understands it, then put the
bridle of fire upon me. God said: Don't give to the fools your
property (4
: 4). There is waming in this verse that it is better to
safeguard knowledge from those who might be corrupted by it.
To give a thing to one who is not fit for it and not to give a thing to
one who
is
fit for
it are equally oppression. A
certain poet
therefore said:
Should I cast pearls before the illiterate shepherds?
They will rtot understand, nor know thir worth.

62
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
Vol-I
si£r»isr
h— *- -s^sksrs
perfect an^ih^T
?
nd
.'?g'
,
Every ma" thinks ‘ha ‘ hi* wisdom is
knowledge that h? Wtet is^STs^e
ebates should not be opened before the common men
to what he preaches, it does not help towards eu dance but U
in;z°
"“hr
" " i*;A »4ss™;;
. d./b, ». I,
,
ir.p
,
the
““J?
Straigh * whe"
people and forget
it for yourselyes - 2^ 44? H^mAh^i'^
s^- ’-'*w rss.rsss
SECTION 6
EVILS OF KNOWLEDGE AND SIGNS OF THE LEARNED
man of the hereafter
learned
Vol-I
KNOWLEDGE
63
puts his learning into practice. He said: Knowledge is of two
kinds-knowledge by tongue which is open proof of God for the
children of Adam and the science of soul which is useful. He said:
In the latter days, there will be ignorant worshippers and sinning
leamed men. He said: Don't acquire knowledge to boast over the
learned nor dispute with the ignorant and gain popularity
among the people. He who does this will go to Hell. He said: He
who conceals his knowledge will be given by God a bridle of fire.
He said:
I fear most for one who appears as Anti-Christ than
Anti-Christ himself. Someone asked him: Who is he? He said: I
fear most for the misguided leaders. He said: He whose
knowledge is great but guidance less is away from God. Jesus
Christ said: How can you guide the night travellers along the
right way when you yourself are perplexed? These and other
traditions show that a learned man faces etemal happiness or
eternal damnation.
SAYINGS OF WISE-MEN
Hazrat Osman said: I fear most for this nation the hypocrite
leamed men. People asked: How can a hypocrite be a learned
man? He replied: He has verbal knowledge, but his mind and his
actions are ignorant. Hazrat Hasan Basari said: Don't be included
within those persons who are learned in wisdom and knowledge
but are equal to the ignorant in actions. Khalid-b-Ahmed said:
There are four kinds of men - (1) One who has real knowledge
and knows that he knows. He is a real leamed man. (2) One who
has knowledge but he does not know that he knows. Be careful of
him. (3) One who has no knowledge and knows that he does not
know. Such a man is fit to be guided, so guide him. (4) One who
has no knowledge and does not know that he knows not. Leave
him alone. Ibn Mobarak said: A man is leamed till he searches for
knowledge. When he thinks that he has knowledge, he becomes
ignorant. Hazrat Hasan said: Death of the heart
is the
punishment of a leamed man. The death of the heart is search of
the world with the actions of the hereafter. A poet said:
"Woe to one who buys misguidance
in lieu of guidance;
"Woe more to one who buys the world
in lieu of the hereafter;
woe still more to one who fosters irreligion
in lieu of religion."

64
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
Vol-I
he PropSet said regarding a wicked leamed man: Some
earned men will suffer such intense agonies of torture that the
mmates of Hell will seek refuge on seeing their tortures. They are
the wicked learned men. The Prophet said: On the resurrection
day a leamed man will be brought and will be thrown into Hell
His bowels will gush forth and he will roam with his bowels as a
donkey moves round a mill-stone. The inmates of Hell will move
along with him and ask: What is the matter with you? He will
reply: I used to enjoin the people to do good but I was not myself
accustomed to do it. I used to prohibit them evil but I myself used
t0
( t° n
TJ
S:^ hyP°crites wil1 remain in the lowest abyss
of Hell (4
: 144) as they refused to accept truth after they acquired
There is a story of Bal'am-b-Baura about whom the Ouran
says: Narrate to them the story of one to whom I revealed My
signs He rejected them. So the devil foIlowed him and he became
one of those who were misguided. He is therefore like a dog which
lolls out lts tongue whether you chase it or leave it alone - 7
: 175.
Thishas been said about the wicked learned man. BaPam also eot
God's book but he kept himself busy in worldly affairs and was
therefore likened to a dog. Jesus Christ said: The wicked leamed
man is hke a rock which has fallen into the source of a stream
It
neighter absolves any water itself, nor permits it to flow out and
reach the plants. The wicked learned man is also like pipes which
come out of a garden full of stenchy smell as it has got graves of
dead men. Its outer part is cultivated but its inner part is full of
dead men'sbones.
These traditions and
historical narratives show that the
learned man who
is given
to
lust and worldly love will be
disgraced and put to endless tortures and one who is a leamed
man of the hereafter will get salvatk n and gain neamess of God.
SIGNS OF THE LEARNED MAN
Ot THE HEREAPTER
There are many signs of the Iearned man of the hereafter. (1)
He does not seek the world by his learning He considers the
world as insignificant and the hereafter as great and ever-lasting.
He considers this world and the next world as diametrically
opposed to each other like two hostile friends of a man or like
two co- wives. If one friend or co-wife is pleased, the other friend
!
i
i
i
Vol-I
KNOWLEDGE
65
or co-wife becomes displeased. The two worlds are like two
scales of a balance, the lower the one
falls, the other rises up
higher. Or they are like the east and the west. The more one
advances towards the east, the more he goes distant from the
west. Or the two worlds are like two pitchers, one is full and
another empty. The more you pour water from the full pitcher
into the empty one, the more the full pitcher will become less and
the empty one more in water. There is defect in the intellect of a
man who has not come to know that the happiness of this world
will soon pass away, as this matter has been established as tme
by veritable sights and experiences. He who does not recognise
the grave nature and stability of the next world is an unbeliever
bereft of faith. He who does not consider this world and the next
world as opposed to each other does not know the religion of the
Prophets and does not believe the Quran from first to last. Such a
learned man is not included within the category of the leamed
men of the hereafter. he who knows these things but does not
love the next world more than this world is in the hand of the
devil.
God said in the scripture of David: If any leamed man loves
his passion more than his love for Myself, My treatment with him
is that I deprive him of the pleasure of communion with Me. O
David, don't take the message of God to such a leamed man. The
world captivated him and he will tum you from My love. Such a
man is a robber in the pathway of My servants. When you see
such a man who searches Me, he is a true servant. O David,
I
write one as a man of sound judgement who flees towards Me. I
will never punish such a person/ For this reason, Hasan Basari
said: Death of the heart is the punishment of a Iearned man and
death of the heart means search of this world in exchange of the
actions of the next world. Hazrat Ihya-b-Muaz said: When the
world
is sought by learning and wisdom/ his light goes
gradually. Hazrat Sayeed-b- Musayyeb said: When you see a
learned man frequenting the houses of mlers, he is a robber.
Hazrat Omar said: When you see a leamed man addicted to this
world, disregard him for the sake of your religion, because every
learned man is addicted to his object of love.
The saint Sahal Tastari said: Every branch of learning
is
worldly except the learning of religion which, if put into practice,
is next worldly. Every action without sincerity is fruitless. He

66
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
VoI-I
!
h
h
e lear"ed ' A" *earned men are i„ a
into practice AH the leanf a
°Se W
Il
0 trans *ate
i*le ' r learning
into pracUce are in e^r TT
their learnin!
leamed men who are sinceream intear’hhT
Th°S°
their ultimate good end
lesus Chri^
vi u
Gy COme to know
counted as a learned ZJ
*T C
Sa,d; How can a man be
world although his iournpV ° Persist® in the pathways of this
Prophet saiH^ h0
u
°ey
IS towards the next world? The
pleasure of God bu«Ty°wMcIThe s^ks woridl” r
h ‘Ch
‘here
is
fh
6t dT
nCe °f Paradise on theReTur^on L;
"°*
the dishonest Iearned mptv tkoh a
,
,
7*
tj^d says of
learning. He descrhbe^h.? 7
!VOUr tWs WOr,d in lion ot
Goddeadn7and gIven
tn as'!!
rned T of
‘he herca^ as
Iearnedmef ofthfworldGodtonkm
fhf
d
re8arding the
Book that they would disclosc it to the ^ple and
e°P'e
,
ofthe
conceal
it, but they threw it behind theirbS and sddT
r
n°‘
small price - 3
• i«j r^A
ana sold it for a
next word: There are such
ySrCgar
ing the ,earr»ed men of the
who believe in what « *
,T™5
,.
‘ e People of the Book
reyealed to you. They don't selUhryersra dTcTdto T
pnce. Their reward is near their Lord - 3
: 198
3 smali
who learn jurisprudence*for an^obiecTcUh
0"*0 “ peop,e: Those
and those who^mMhe worL w th th
6r ?
‘hi“ °f rcliSion
world are like those who wear th. A
!*' actlons o( the next
people but whose
??
bef°re the
tongues are sweeter than honey but their hp
P
0, ves. Their
«han colocynth. They deceive Me and scornMeTwdi“ucT
a calamity for them which will perplex even the oahenTT
Prophet said: The learned men of my tollowers areof twn h'
sell
it for a smT^ce^hl h.rHc
.rT
11 '"8 3nd they do not
water, all «he animTls tn^ wor.dTndTh.T"'
th
f,
fiSheS in
invoke blessings
for them. The^ will
^ come" toGod
d*r “ '"«r *»'
8« ‘S
I
Vol-I
KNOWLEDGE
67
sell
it for a small price. Such people will be brought on the
resurrection day with bridles of fire and they will raise up shrieks
before all the creatures. It will be proclaimed: They are children
of so and so. God gave them leaming but they were miser in
distributing it to the people and took small price in lieu thereof
and property in exchange. Thus they will be punished
till God
finishes the judgment of account.
A more severe punishment will be meted out to the following
kind of people. A certain man was a servant of Prophet Moses. He
went round saying: Moses, the chosen man of God told me this.
Moses, the confident of God, told me this. Moses, the intimate
friend of God, told me this. Saying these, he became rich and then
disappeared. Moses searched for him but his whereabouts were
not found. Sometime after, a man came to Moses with a pig with a
rope tied to its neck. Moses said to him: Do you know such and
such a person? He said: Yes, he is this pig. Moses said to hin\j O -
Lord, turn him into his former position. I shall ask him about his
condition. God revealed to him. If you remember Me with wKat
Adam and his successors remembered Me, I shall not accept your
invocation.
I shall inform you how he was changed
to
this
condition. He searched for the world in lieu of religion.
A more severe narration was reported by Muaz-b-Jabal to the
effect that the Prophet had said: "One danger of a leamed man is
that he would prefer talking than hearing, as there
is
omamentation and exaggeration in his speech. A speaker is not
free from these faults but there is safety and wisdom in silence.
There is such a man among the learned who guards his learning
but does not like to communicate it to others. Such a learned man
is in the first stage of Hell. There is such a man among the leamed
who is like a king in leaming. In other words, if any objection is
raised against learning, he becomes angry. He is in the second
stage of Hell. There
is such a man among the learned who
broadcasts his learning and narrates traditions to the rich and not
to those who are in need of them. Such a learned man is in the
third stage of Hell. There is such a man among the learned who
remains busy with legal decisions and commits mistakes and
remains
satisfied with one who does divine service. Such a
learned man is in the fourth stage of Hell. There is such a man
among the learned who delivers lectures quoting the sayings of
the Jews and Christians to show his learning. Such a Iearned man

68
THE book of worship
Vol-I
c
a leamedmanisintheseventhstageofHell.
whaltTetw^htt^and ?hf^
S° mUCh tha* “ fi,,s UP
even like the
J
d
. the west' ,l ,s not valuable to God
eveiy leamecT^^n^slt^lh^thp l^*
1e ^>
la
,,,hetSa 'd Don ts** w' lh
five matte
T*t man who ca,,s ‘owards
=^mKka
thingtoGodthatyousaywhatyoudono^o
6
y
i
S:
3 r H
ha ‘efUl
aS5.-W'£ri~i4
iSIss
44”“'*'”'”
»T™y"S,5iT
.. .» .. ssiisss““
0“„Tisx"
g
pregnancyisexr>oseH shel.
b
pregnant but when her
according to his leaming. Hazrat Muaz saKware o/ the
!farUed r" VL
rr°r' because he is the most honoured one amone
the P60^ and
'he people /oilow his error. Hazrat (Zar
Vol-I
KNOWLEDGE
69
said: Three things will cause the end of time. One of them is the
error of the leamed men. Hazratlbn Mas'ud said: Soon there will
come a time over the people when sweetness of heart will vanish.
At that time neither the teachers, nor the taught will get any
benefit from leaming. The hearts of the learned will be hard like a
hard stone. Rains will fall on it from the sky but it will slip away
therefrom. The reason is that the hearts of the leamed will be
addicted to the love of this world in preference to that of the next
world. God will then rob them of the fountain of wisdom and
extinguish the light of guidance from their hearts. They will say
to you by their tongue Tear God' but sin will be exposed in their
actions. Tongue will then become dry and heart hard. The only
reason is that the teachers will teach except for the sake of God
and the students will leam except for the sake of God. There is
written in the Torah and Bible: Don't search for learning which
you do not know till you do what you know. Hazrat Huzaifa said:
You are now in an age wherein if you gi ve up one tenth of what you
know, you will perish, but there will soon come an age wherein if a
man does one-tenth of what he knows will get salvation.
The simile of the leamed man is that of a judge. The Prophet
said: Judges are of three classes. One class of judges judge with
justice and with knowledge of truth and they will go to Paradise.
Another class of judges judge unjustly with or without
knowledge of truth and they will go to Hell. Another class of
judges judge contrary to the laws of God and they will go to Hell.
The Prophet said: The devil sometimes will prevai! over you on
account of knowledge. It was questioned: O Prophet of God, how
will it happen? He said: The devil will say: Search for knowledge
but don't put it into practice till you acquire it. So he will remain
busy with :acquisition of knowledge but will remain without
action up to his death and at the time of his death he will have no
action. Hazrat Ibn Mas'ud said: The Quran was revealed in order
that men may direct their lives according to its teachings. Direct
your life according as you read
it. There will soon appear such
men who will keep it like an arrow and they are not good among
you. The leamed man who does not act up to his knowledge is
like a patient who describes the qualities of a medicine without
using it or like a hungry man who describes the taste of a food
without eating it. God said: Woe unto you for what you utter. The
Prophet said: What I fear most for my followers is the errors of
the learned and the arguments of the hypocrites about the Quran.

70
the book of worship
Vol-I
next world
is that his mind wou?d ^
'earned man of the
learnings as
will be uselul torlh^
d 'rected lowards such
encouragement to pious deeds
"
•J”r d and 8ive
"which
will bring lesser benetit
,-i
'
! avoid th°se leamings
arguments. He who shuns.hc ,!
Whf
ein
|here are much
busy in arguments is like a sick
°[ Pr‘u
'tlct' and remains
diseases, but when he tears deatlT he W ° SUfferS from many
physician and asks him many ouesHons of the
“
exPerienced
and complexities of medicalprofcssion bu th!T
“ °fdruSs
about his diseases. This is the LigSohshness“
Wm
«*
m,
have you done with the beeinnin^ nf v ^e*^e ashec* him What
What is the beginning ofkCE Th°e'PW*?
? The man sai*
y°u known God? He said- Ypq w
iTh
f f
roPhet rephed: Have
about this truth? He said- What God
h ‘’ V<' y ‘,U ,earnt
Have you known death? He said- vl h
ProPhet s«<d :
prepared for it? He said- Whaf r a
e
?,', He Sa,d: How have you
and gain exper^^
you someof thestrange thingsoi knowledge
Sha" ,each
A student should be like Hazraf
a
disciple of Hazrat Shaqiq Balakhi H^
A
fem who was the
long are you in my company’ Hate
°nce asked Hatem: How
He said: What have ZS ^
Sa,d: For
fhe ,ast 33 years.
Hatem said:
1 have learnt onlv
•
to* /*?e durin8
th,s period?
have not learnt except eieht thimrcrtj
* thlngs - Shaqiq said: You
have leamt no thing
P
excep
e 2 ^
YeS ' 0dear teacher, I
fa!sehood. He said: Describe those e!ehfth
* d°n
'
f WiSh t0 sPeak
fhem. Ha tem began to describe them
8
ln8s to me. Letmehear
he goes to the grave
it bernmp
^
thmg UntiI his death - When
over the fo.,o^«God
Pondered
When Twmgo to thegravTmv
80
°d
S ™y °bje^ °^ve
VoI-I
KNOWLEDGE
71
from lust, paradise is his resting place - 79
: 40 Q. I have come to
know that the words of God are true. I have tried my utmost to
suppress my
lust and remained satisfied with obeying the
injunctions of God.
Third, I looked around the people and found that everyone
values what he possesses. Then I turned to the following words
of God: What is with you will end and wnat is with God will last -
16:98 Q. Then I began to give unto God whatever valuable things
fell into my hands.
Pourth, I looked around and saw that everyone puts his trust
in his wealth and properties, his name and fame and his honour
and glory and found that there is nothing in them. Then I looked
towards the following words of God The most honourable of
you to God is one who is the most God-fearing among you' - 49
:'
13Q. Then
I intended to accept God-fear in my life
till
I am
honoured by God.
Fifth, I looked around the people and found them slandering
and cursing one another because of envy and hatred and then
I
looked towards the words of God: It is
I who distributed their
subsistence among them in this world's life - 43
: 31 Q. So I gave
up envy and hatred and realised that subsistence comes from
God and then I disliked the people no more.
Sixth,
T looked to the people and found them ungrateful to
one another and even some of them kill others and then I looked
towards the following word of God: The devil is your foe and so
take him as foe - 35
: 6 Q. So I took the devil as a foe and ceased to
have enmity with the people.
Seventh, I turned to the people and found everyone seeking
his livelihood and for that debasing himself and committing
unlawful things and then I Iooked towards the following words
of God: There is no animal in the earth of which the provision is
not upon God
- 11
: 8Q. Finding that
I am one of the animals
whose provision
is upon God,
I turned towards the duties
prescribed by God and entrusted my fate unto Him.
Eighth,
I turned
to the people and found
that everyone
placed his trust in something created, some in his wealth, some in
his profession, some in his industry and some in the health of his
body and then looked towards the following words of God: If a

72
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
Vol-I
man rehes on God, He is sufficient for him - 65
: 3Q. Then I relied
I
onGodand Heissufficientforme.
!
On hearing Hatem, Hazrat Shadiq exclaimed; Hatem, may
SalmO
SPe
H Tl?
U '
eXam
ined the Torah' the Bible-
‘he Jabur
(Psalms) and the great Quran and found that all these centre
and he "ho Pota—
rSS
;
knowledge^b^tlw ^am^men' of the^worid^re engagod 'in
next
(
wor?d
U
^Th!,fhe h& A
T'
her Sig" of the leamed man of the
next world is that he has got no attraction for various kinds nf
f°ods and drinks, luxury in dresses, furnitures and houses but
rather he adopts moderate course in all these things following
ewmh ™
Th
S
e'l
a '’d he
iS b6St satisfied with fhe least of
eyerything. The less
is a man attracted towards luxuries
the
more he
will be close
to God and the more he will be in
association of the leamed men of the hereafter and in rank.
Abdullah-b-Khawas used
to keep company with Hazrat
!j
atet" Aser? and hesaid: Onco 1 with 320 pilgrims went to Rayy
n!t f
8 T»,
Sage Hatem Asem ' We had f00d s ‘uffs with usand
ot food. We went to a merchant who was well known for love of
?
heP
H
rWe became his Suests ‘ha ‘ nfght. He said next day to the
age Hatem: Have you got any necessity with me? I wish now to
go to see an aihng theologian. Hatem said: "Visiting the sick is no
alnn*
mer,t0rioos but iookmg af‘°r the poor is wofship. I wih go
along with
i you. The sick man was Muhammad-b-Maqatil, iudge
of Rayy. When we came near his gate, we looked at his loftv and
beauhful palace Hatem thought for a moment and then Sd
,s
th.s the condition of the house of a learned man? After
permission, we entered the houseand found it very beautiful and
spcious with carpets spread
all over the floor and sc!e!ns ol
vaned colours hanging. The judge lay down on a oft mattress and
S
v
T7u W“ standlnS with a
near his head. The merchant
!rH
Ut h,S
.h?alth but Hatem stood silent. Being requested to
S.t, he d,d not s.t but asked the judge: From whom have 1,
your leammg? He said: From the companions of the Apostle of
God. He asked him: From whom did the companions learn? He
Vol-I
KNOWLEDGE
73
said: From the Apostle of God, He asked: From whom did the
Apostle of God learn? He said: From Gebriel and he learnt from
God. Hatem asked: Have you found in their learnings that to God
the rank of a man whose palace is high and spacious is grater? He
said: No. He asked: What then have you found? The judge said: I
found therein that a man who renunciates the world, turns his
attention towards the next world, loves the poor and proceeds
towards the hereafter has got a great rank near God. Hatem said
to the judge: Whom have you followed, prophets or their
companions, or the pious men, or Pharaoh and Namrud who
erected lofty buildings with bricks? The dishonest leamed men
like you are fools. Then he went away from that place.
Ibn MaqatiFs sickness became thereafter acute and the
inhabitants of Rayy came to know what passed between him and
Hatem. They said to Hatem: The palace of Tanafusi and Qazawin
is more lofty and spacious. Hatem went there on his own accord
and said
to Tanafusi: May God have mercy on you!
I am a
foreigner and I wish that you should teach me the elements ofmy
religion and the particulars of ablution. Tanafusi said: Yes, O lad,
bring a pot of water. when
it was brought, Tanafusi made
ablution and washed each limb thrice and said: This
is thus
Hatem said:
I am making ablution in your presence. Then he
began to wash each limb four times. Tanafusi said: O Shaikh, you
have been extravagant and washed your hands four times.
Hatem said: O glorious God, i have been extravagant for washing
my hands four times, but you do not consider yourself extravagant
for what you are in all these luxuries. Tanafusi then came to know
that he had no necessity of learning from him ablution. Thereafter
he did not come out to the people for forty days.
Hatem once went to Bagdad and there Imam Ahmad went to
see him and asked him: What will ensure salvation from the
world? Hatem said: You are not safe in this world unless you
possess four characteristics - (1) overlook the ignorance of man,
(2) conceal your ignorance from them, (3) seek their good and (4)
don't seek anything from them.
When the sage Hatem went
to Madina, some of
its
inhabitants went to him and he asked them: O people, what is the
name of this city? They said: It is the city of the Prophet of God.
He asked: Where is the palace of the Prophet of God?
I shall
observe my prayer therein. They said: He had no palace except a

74
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
Vol-I
only cottages in this world for res/2lt2 y T'
71,07 had
city then is the city of Pharaoh Th^ n
S‘!'d: ° PeopIe, this
Governor and said- This man k
!, f„ 7 brou8ht hlm before the
•he city of Pharaoh. Theg7vernor
Ws ‘S
this? Hatem said: Don't be haTtv i„
.
hy d° 70u ufter
foreigner. Thenhenarratedth» 7
i,
.
gment upon me. I am a
and some Medinites
behveeu btm
Prophet of God an excetn^exampfe
33
21 O m
in ‘he
have you adopted, example - 33
21 O m
2 ‘
W
oxamPle
adopted, example of theTrophet or^mT* ^^!P,e have y°u
him.ThesearethestoriesofHatemAsem
a°
7
'hen
'eft
un.aTT,
0
bTircr
0
eaTs
n
rnd
n
ne!T
n
thin8s >* not
at the end becomes difficult. The PropheMtd^
tC>
tf
1Ve them UP
renunciation of the world
It h *<=
, ph
1 d,d not lay stress for
Yahya-b-Syeed onceTrom
,
.
been narrated
that Caliph
the name of God, the Most MerdfuT «Im
b-Anas saying; In
and blessings on Prophet Muhamm d T
°St t-omPass '°nate
to Malek-b-Anas: lZve b^„ fnZmPd JhT
Yah7a 'b-Sayeed
cloths, eat delicious fond
ei»0
ed that you Put on
door-keeperatyourdoor. You sitl theaTmW Tl ^ 3
and people come to vnn
a-
*.
f assemb,y of learning
you as Imam ,2 heCeTaTstd T £
Th°7 have takeu
fear God, take
,o Zmmte
h y°m W°'
° Malek'
admonition,. None has seen
it«
‘
,
7°U
th,S
letter as an
Malekwrotebacksayine
l ha
0ntents exceP* God.
Imam
come to me as a n dTL
,
[
eCe
J VedyourIetteraud ithas
condugt. May God bless v'ou
0
r
n
niet
ndne
d
S a "d 3 S '8n to 8ood
advice. I seek His hpln
iiT
'
7 and revv;,rd you for your
His help. We dTwa,
P
vou r/
"° P°Wer a"d mi8ht except by
of Cod
P
for ttel God
SaM
Vew
n
h
0"0^ bU '^ forSiveues
fineries of God which God ha« „ift d
haa made u nlawtul
the
and pure foods - 7 320’
I k„n
8 iU
f
°,
' S servants and clean
these things
is betteMh"2L?'
'2 abstiuence from
p..r„“s,t:r„s,v
Vol-I
KNOWLEDGE
75
(5) FIFTH SIGN: Another sign of the learned man of the
hereafter
is that he keeps himself distant from the ruling
authorities aifd avoids their company, because
this world
is
sweet, ever-new and its bridle is in their hands. He who comes
near them is not free from their pleasures and harms. They are
mostly unjust and do not obey the advices of the leamed men.
The leamed man who frequents them will look to their grandeurs
and then think God's gift upon him as insignificant. To keep
company with the rulers is the key to evils. The Prophet said: He
who lives in desert becomes hard-hearted, he who follows them
becomes unmindful and he who frequents the rulers falls into
danger. He said also: Soon you will have rulers to whom you will
bear allegiance or not. He who rejects his allegiance to them will
be save and he who hates them will be safe but God will keep him
distant who remains satisfied with them and follows them. He
was asked: Shall we fight with them? The Prophet said: No, till
theypray.
Hazrat Huzaifa said: Be careful of the place of danger. He
was asked: What is it? He said: The palaces of the rulers. Some
one of you will go to a ruler, approve his lies and say that he
possesses an attribute which he does not actually possess. The
Prophet said: The learned are the representatives of the Prophets
to the people till they do not mix with the rulers. When they mix,
they commit treachery with the Prophets. So beware of them and
don't mix with them. Hazrat Sayed-b-Musayyeb said: When you
see a learned man frequenting the house of a ruler, beware of his
company as he is a thief. Hazrat Aozayi said: There is nothing
more hateful to God than a learned man who frequents the house
of a ruler. The Prophet said: The learned men who frequent the
houses of rulers are worst and the rulers who frequent the houses
of the learned men are best. Hazrat Maqhul said: He who learns
the Quran and becomes expert in religious learning but comes to
the company of the rulers out of greed is immerged in the sea of
Hell fire. When you see a learned man loving the world, convert
Hazrat Hasan Basari said: There lived before your time a
man who was born in Islam and enjoyed the company of the
Prophet. He
is Sa'ad-b-Abi Waqas. He did not frequent the
houses of rulers and hated it. His sons said to him : Those who are
like you in following Islam and keeping company with the

76
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
Vol-I
if °phf
frequent
1
the houses of rulers. It would have been better
corose IndT" T
°USeS'
Said: ° dear sons' the »™rld is a
corpse and the people surround it. By God, I will not be a partner
dLTT
' f ‘ am ahle to do ih
«aid
: O lather, you wMl then
,
f
? tarvat'on. He said
: O sons, I would rather starve to death
to the or,
aS a great man with hypocrisy. Hazrat Hasan used to say
o *he oppos.ng parties
: By God, know that earth will consume
heT
h and fat but not faith - Hazrat Omar-b-AbduI Az“e
l.Ti
i
*
Hasan Basan say‘n8
: Name such persons to me who
him
ThosT
6
h
enf°rC
j
n8 the «njunctions of God. He replied to
him
. Those who are religious do not wish to go to you. You will
nnh|
WISh tHe company of those who love the world Keep the
noble m company as they will defile their honour by breach of
herel
6
ftefuTaflGT
Another
.
si8n of the leamed man of the
erealter is that he does not give Fatwa or legal decision in a
hurry but tarnes to be relieved of it. When he is asked abnut a
matter known to him from the Quran, Hadi S/ Ijma and Qiyas he
g ves his opinion, When he has doubt, he says
: I doiVt know
When he is asked about a matter about which he has formed an
rnPo!l° h
thr
?Ugh
Xi tihadr independent interpretation and
matt T°
n'
1S CarefuI not to commit. himself but refer the
matte
to someone else who
is more capable than himself
Accordmg to one tradition
: There are three roots of learning the
express word of the Quran, the lasting usage of the PropheHand
don'fknow" ishalTT ^ me'rep0rter) - The sage Shubi said
: 'T
aon t know
is half of Iearnmg. He who remains silent for God
wing to his lgnorance gets reward not less than that of the man
who doesnot remain silent, because to confess one's ignorance is
he most ddhcult thing . Such was the condiHon of companionsof
gTtkm T
‘m
CarlT
Sages - When Ibn °mar was asked any
^((
• T
' he wou,d say
: Go to the ruler, because he has taken thp
affairs of men. Hazrat Ibn Mas'ud said
: He who gives opintenas
S°T
aS
,
aT
eS
j'0,
I
‘S pUt to him is mad - He also safd
: I don't know
amounto mmd
a
ei
ear”ed
" he C°mmitS mistakes '' ir would
the dfTth
m
anat
d
a
a
rnT
id:
* n°‘hing more formidabIe to
nr.
i
.eamed man who manifests his knowledce both
openly and sahmty. The devil says
: Look to this man. HissdTe
is severer to me than his speech.
suence
Vol-I
KNOWLEDGE
77
Some wise man said: There are Abdals (worshipers) in the
world
. Their meal ends when they are still hungry. They sleep
when
it overcomes them. Their words end only in necessary
talks. In other words, they donot speak unless asked and they
remain
silent when sufficient reply
is obtained from others.
When compelled, they reply. Ibn Omar used to say
: Do you wish
to use us as a bridge over which you wish to cross over to HelL
Abu Hafs Nishapuri said
: A learned man is he who fears the day
of ^uestions, who fears that he will be asked on the Resurrection
Day
: Wherefrom have you got this answer
: The Prohpet said
: I
don't know whether Uzair was a Prophet or not, whether Tubba
was accursed or not, whether Zul-Qarnain was a Prophet or not.
When asked about the best and worst places on the earth, the
Prophet said
: I don't know. But the Almighty God said to me that
the best place is mosque and the worst place is market. When
Hazrat Ibn Omar was asked ten question S/ he replied only one
and not others, Hazrat Ibn Abbas replied nine and did not reply
one. Someone said that among the jurists, the greater number
were men who used to say we don't know than the numbers who
who used to say we know. Sufiyan Saori said
: Malek-b-Anas,
Ahmad-b-Hanbal, Fuzail, Bashar and others were among the
tormer, Abdur Rehman-b- Abi Laila said
:
I met in this mosque
120 companions of the Prophet among whom there was none
who when questioned to express an opinion would not have
wished that someone else would reply to
it. It is narrated that
when somebody presented something to someone of Ahle Suffa,
he would give it to another who would give it to another and so
on, until it finally came back to the first one. Now see what was
the condition of the learned men of that age and what
is the
condition now.
The Prophet said: Let not the people seek legal decision
except from three persons, a ruler or a person to whom power is
delegated or a religious man. Some one said
: the companions
used
to refer
to one another about four things-Immate
(leadership), Wasiat (legacy), Amant (deposit) and Fatwa (legal
decision). Someone said
: One who hurriedly used
to give
opinion was a less learned man. The activites of the companions
and their followers were confined only to four things, reading the
Quran,building mosques, Zikr of God and enjoining good had
forbiding evil. They heard the Prophet say
: There is no good in
most of their secret talks except only
in. his who enjoins

78
amon8 men - Hazrat^
used to be placed El H». '?n
C,ST' when Put t0 tho">-
warriors who took oart in th» h
who used to call all the
Sa '<' :
“^^dopKng^leTC^and^asc^ '^16
take advice from him, as he is not free fr<Mn wdsdom"^
aScettclsm'
pubi^who
a Muth^T^ero^
kmd
,
S ' 3
,Iearned m- *>r *he
ot the ruler, and anth" rea^d^tor^Id^nd “Trr
and he resides in solitude
It is said
I
,
d good deeds
Imam Ahmad-b-Hanbal who
WaS
everyone used to take bene/it from him Th»
T I'8™and
was also like him He was likp *
him * The sage Bashr-b-Hares
visited by a single pereoiTat^a time
3
A wise1ma'n said
• Wh^
j
Water
ledge increases, loquacity decreases.
d
’ Wh
know
give no^y.WhenKAnaf
Darda
'a ' he Used to
say
: Ask our leader Hazrat Ahh!'^
^ a0ythlnS' he used 1°
asked, he used ,o sa" "
b
lzrat Abh^ was
asked anything, he used ,o say : Ask Sayeed-toMus^^
13 '
the nexfworidb"haI hk
Sl
Ven‘h sign of the lea rned man of
knowledge1
S
erva«on mT h^*
1
fanxeit>' is t0 Ieatn oecrea
the hereater
to7ravef1 ^knowledge of the paths of
finding
self In^a^Tand
nh° "T
faith in
mortirication leads to Mushahadah
bsertlon ' because
self
How the tountain of wisdom to
,
,
u°l
COntemp'a,ion and >*»
science of heart. RealgTb^kstd^
e mtrwate detoi,5 0 f ,he
not sufficient for
it. But this wisdom a
Fnmg °f sclences are
labour. „ opens if
°f hard
turned with humility of snirif
f
with God with a mind
self-morH fica,ion. obsereation and«L ™s
and
h
‘h™U8h
ih^ta74^'”S/°
r *
students who cut shnr* fi,m,
a
.
'
earc*- There are many
actions and obserta^tons oOhe^heari^God^on
'n
mceties of wisdom tor which the wi H^
for themI the
perplexed. For this reaTon
' the
d
7*“'
according to his leaming, God gweAinl Z! a 'knL^ge^as
Vol-I
KNOWLEDGE
79
was unknown to him. It was also mentioned in one of the books
of ancient ages
: O children of Israil, don't say that knowledge is
in heaven. Who will bring it down to the earth? Don't say
that
knowledge is in the lowest abyss of the earth ? Who will dig it
out? Don,t say that knowledge is far beyond the ocean. Who will
bring it after crossing it ?
Know, O dear readers, that knowledge is in your hearts. Take
its lesson from those who have got knowledge of soul or heart
and make one's character like that of the Truthful and than
knowledge will spring forth in heart so much so that
it will
immerge him therein. Sahal-Tastari said
: The learned men, the
worshipers and the ascetices departed from the world with their
hearts locked up. They can not be opened except by the hearts of
the truthful and martyrs, Then he recited this verse of God
: To
him are the keys of unseen thing. None knows them but He-6
: 59.
Had it not been for the fact that the light of the heart of one who
has « heart with inner light determines the outward or esoteric
knowledge, the Prophet would not have said
: If they seek justice
to you (thrice), ask your heart. The Prophet said that God said
: A
man continue to come close to Me with optional divine services
till I love him. When I love him, I become his ears with which he
hears, etc. So many are the subtle meanings of the mysteries of
the Quran that appear in the hearts of those persons who have
devoted themselves to Zikr and maditation of God.
It is not
found in the commentaries and
it also did not appear in the
hearts of the reputed commentators, It appear as a result of the
meditation of a devotee. When its meaning is presented to the
commentators. They take it as good and realise that they are the
news of a pure soul and a gift of God arising out of sincere
devotion and reflection. The condition of secret knowledge, the
science of practical religion and the subtleties of the flow of
thoughts of the heart is similar Each of these beneficial leamings
is an ocean of which the depth is beyond reach. Each disciple gets
its clue in proportion to his ability and good deeds.
Hazrat Ali said in the course of a long discouse about such
men
: Hearts are like different vessels and the best vessel is tha.t
which holds good things. Men are of three kinds, the divine
learned men, the
travellers
to the path of salvation and
the
ignorant people calling towards evils who are swayed by every
passing wind. Their hearts are not illumined by the light of

80
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
Vol-I
knowtedge and stand not on its firm foundation. Knowledce is
Knnwl ^
an
.Wealth ' U 8uards y°u< but you guard wealth,
Knowledge mcreases by expense, while wealth descreases.
'
earning is knowledge by which religion is ieamt and by which
allegiance is obtained in your life time and which becomes a good
thing to be remembered after your death. Knowledge is a judee
and wealth seeks justice. Along with death the benefits of wealth
d^sappear but the benefits of knowledge remain. All people are
Z
a 'd^
ut th
,
e 'earn
!d are aliye and will live as long as time shall
lasl. Then taking a deep breath and pointing to his breast, Hazrat
r
'' Sa 'd
i * laa' her
f'
is abandant knowledge, but I find none to
carry it, I don
t find any trusted seeker but I find such men who
eek the world with the weapon of religion and attribute to the
nends of God the gifts of God and give prevalence of His proof
over H.s creations, make subdued the seekers of truth, but on the
first onslaught of oposiHon doubt arises in their minds. They lose
their insight owing to theirscepticism and keep themselves busy
in indulgences. They amass wealth and hoard it. O God, thus will
knowledge pensh when its people will die. The world will not be
free of men who will establish religion secretly and openly in
order that the proofs of God are not obliterated. They will be few
m m*mber but they will be great in honour. They will be lost
open^, but their pictures will reign in hearts. God will preserve
His religion through them. They will leave the religion for their
successors and will plant it in the hearts of the young. The real
nnture of knowledge ledge will be disclosed with their help. They
will getgood news from the life of sure faith. They will make easv
Wha
.,
the "Chth 'nk difficu,t and they wi» make clear what the
e
. thlnk obscure - They will keep company with the world
with their bodies, but thei r souls will be kept hanging in lofty places
p>ey are servants of God among His peiple! His trustees and
earth
' r
,en he wept and -d '
eagarTamlo
u
are He attnbutes of the teamed men of the next
world which can be gained by constant actions and sincere efforts.
(8) EIGHT SIGN: Another sign of the learned man of the next
world !s that he is sincere and upright for making his faith firm
Sure^th^h
,rT
fa,th iS the rGOt °f re,i8ion - The Prophet said:
?nl
e ^
b
be,lef ,n ,tsentirely or perfect faith. So it is necessary
o learn the Jearmng of faith, after which the path of the heart will
e opened. For this reason the Prophetsaid: Leam sure faith/ In
other words, keep company with those who have firm faith, hear
VoI-I
KNOWLEDGE
81
from them the learning of sure faith, follow them always, so that
your faith may become firm as their faith became firm. A little
sure faith is better than many actions. When two persons, one of
whose sure faith' was good but whose sins more and another
whose actions were more and faith little, were mentioned to the
Prophet, he said: There
is no man without sin. One whose
intellect is short and faith sure cannot be injured by sin, because
whenever he commits
sin, he repents and seeks forgiveness.
Thus his sins are expiated and his virtues remain intact and he
enters paradise. For this reason, the Prophet said: Among the
things you have been given, the least
is firm faith and
determination for patience. Whoever is given a special share of
these two, has got faith even if he misses prayer at night and
fasting by day. Loqman advised his son: O dear son, action is not
possible except through firm faith in religion. A man cannot act
except in proportion to his sure faith and his action does not
decrease except when his sure faith decreases. Ihya ibn Muaz
said: Tauhid (monotheism) has got light and shirk (polytheism)
fire. The light of Tauhid for the sins of the monotheists is more
warm than the fire of polytheists for their virtues. Here light
means sure
faith. God referred to those who have sure faith
several times in the Quran and pointed out also that through
faith they receive His blessings.
The reply to the question - What is meant by Yeqin or sure faith
is as follows. The philosophers and the scholastic theologians say
that its meaning is faith in objects beyond doubt. There are four
states of a person when he is eager to know the truth of a thing.
Firstly when truth and falsehood are equal in the mind of a person.
Such a state is called doubt. Secondly, if mind inclines more to a
thing out of the two
states and
if mind knows that
it may be
otherwise, the first state will be stronger. For instance, if you are
asked about a man who is in your sight pious and God-fearing,
whether he will be punished or not, your mind inclines more to his
not being punished as there are outward signs of his piety. Never
the less you admit the possibility that something which requires
punishment has been concealed in his secret life. This admission is
mixed with your
first inclination and creates in your mind
conjecture. The third state is that the mind is strongly indined to a
thing and opinion adverse to
it cannot come to
it. This is called
Fteqad or belief approaching certainty. This is the conjecture of
the general public about religious matters.

82
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
KNOWLEDGE
83
Vol-I
The fourth state is sure or certain faith in a matter without the
least doubt in
it. This is called 'yeqin'. For instance, when a wise
man is asked: "Is there anything etemal in existence" he cannot
suddenly reply to it as the etemal thing is not subject to conjecture
or perceived by the sense^ and it is not like the sun and the moon of
which the truth can be perceived by eyes. So the existence of an
etemal thing cannot suddenly be said to be true without thought.
The truth of an etemal thing is not such as the truth that two is
greater than one or as the truth that nothing can occur without a
cause. Knowledge of these things come out spontaneously without
the necessity of any thought. So tme belief in the truth of an etemal
thing does not come spontaneously in the mind. Those who have
knowledge of an eternal thing tell the people of it and the people
believe it and stand on it. This is called I'tiqad or faith. This is the
state of all common people.
But there are such men who established the truth of an
etemal matter by such proof as follows. If there be no existence of
an eternal thing, then all things are originated or created. If all the
things are created, they come without cause or some of them
come to existence without cause. This
is impossible and that
which leads to impossibility is itself impossible. Therefore the
mind
is compelled
to believe in the existence of something
eternal. All things fall under one of the three categories. 91) All
existing things are eternal, (2) or all existing things are originated
or created,
(3) or somethings are eternal and somethings are
originated. If all things are eternal, the object is attained as the
truth of eternal things has been established by proof. But if all
things are created,
it becomes impossible as the existence of a
thing becomes without a cause. In that case, either the first or the
third position
is established. The knowledge thus obtained
through reasoning such as above or through the mind
instinctively as the impossibility of any created thing coming
into existence without a cause or through traditions as the
knowledge that there
is existence of Mecca, or through
experimentation such as our knowledge that cooked scammony
is purgative, or through some evidences as we have already
stated, is called Yeqin or certain faith. The ordinary meaning of
Yeqir. is belief without doubt.
The second meaning of Yeqin is that of the jurists, sufis atid
most of the learned men.
It
is not to look at a thing with
Vol-I
conjecture or doubt. For instance, it is said that so and so has got
weak faith about death, although there is no doubt in it. Another
instance
is
that so and so has firm
faith in eaming wealth,
although a time comes when he cannot even earn his livelihood.
Thus whenever anything prevails over the mind and enjoins one
to do and prohibits him not to do is called Yeqin or certain faith.
All people believe firmly about death and it is free from doubt,
but there are men who don't tum their attention to it and there
are men who engage all their thoughts towards preparation for
death. Such men are called men of strong faith. For this reason,
some one said:
I have seen nothing so certain and at the same
time completely unheeded as death. According to this, faith may
be described either with strength or with weakness. What I wish
to impress is that the object of the learned man of the hereafter is
to make his faith strong, certain and firm as it is a medicine of
doubt, so that it becomes so strong in his mind that it can rule
over him.
Thus
it is clear from what has been described above.,that
Yeqin can be described in there meanings
- as to strength and
weakness, increase and decrease and cleamess and vagueness.
What the Prophets said from the first to the last is a subject of
certain faith. Yeqin is a work of special Marfat. These matters
appertain to Shariat and I am mentioning some of thes matters
which are the roots of certain faith.
(1) TAUHID: This is to^>elieve firmly that all things come
from the Cause of all causes, with no attention to the secondary
causes but to the First Cause.
It is not to look to the means or
intermediaries but to the original and primary cause. It is that all
causes come from Him and that everything is within His control
and power. It is that everything is subject to His will and nothing
has got any will of its own. If one has got sure faith in this Tauhid,
his wrath on others, hatred for others and jealousy for others
vanish away and His will remains supreme in his mind. Then to
him, the means or intermediaries become like hand and pen. He
does not express gratefulness to hand and pen as he considers
them as weapons and means. This certain faith is highest in rank.
Then he understands that the sun, moon, stars, animals, plants
and
all creatures are subject to His order, that the pen moves
under the control of the Writer who moves them. (2) From this,
his faith that God provides every man with subsistence grows

84
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
Vol-I
strong. God says: There is no moving animal in the earth whose
provision is not upon God (9
: 8Q). He believes that what has
been pre-ordained for him must come to pass. The result of
this certain faith is that he will not regret for anything he loses.
(3) Then he beliew?s firmly in the following: Whoever does an
atom weight of good will find
it and whoever does an aton)
weight of evil will find it - (99
: 7). That is a faith of reward and
punishment. As there is connection of bread with satisfaction of
stomach and punishment with sins or poison with loss of Iife, so
he finds connection of good deeds with rewards aitd of evil deeds
with punishment. As there is greed to satisfy hunger whether its
quantity is large or small, so he strives to do all acts of worship,
whether few or many. Just as a man avoids poison regardless of
quantity, so a man avoids sins, major or minor. Belief in its first
meaning is found among all believers, while certain belief of the
second meaning
is found only in the favourites of God. The
stronger the faith, the stronger is carefulness and the more are the
religious actions.
Fourthly, he believes
that God watches him
in
all
circumstances and sees his currents of thoughts in mind and
machinations of the devil. This certain faith is in accordance with
the
first interpretation. The object
is noble according
to the
second interpretation as it is the faith of a Siddiq. In this case, he
observes all the ettiquits in loneliness as he observes them before
an emperor. For this reason, he makes his heart more pure and
clean than his body. In
this condition, shame,
fear, humility,
peace, modesty and all other praise worthy qualities appear in
him. So certain faith is the root and its branches are many.
(9) NINTH SIGN: Another sign of the learned man of the
next world is that he becomes humble and adopts silence. The
effect of God-fear appears on
his body, dress, character
movements, speech and
silence.
If any man looks at him,
it
reminds him of God and his nature and character are proofs of
his actions. His eye is a mirror of his mind. The signs of the
learned man of the hereafter are recognised
in
his
face,
tranquillity, modesty and freedom from pride and vanity. A
Certain wise man said: God has not given a man with a garment
better than the garment of God-fear.
It is the garment of the
Prophets, Siddiqs, pirs and the learned men. The sage Sahal
Tastari divided the learned into three classes. (a) One class are
i
Vol-I
KNOWLEDGE
85
those who are well acquainted with the commands of God but
not punishment of God. They are examined by lawful and
unlawful things. Such kind of learning is God-fear which cannot
be inherited. (2) Another class are those who have got knowledge
of the commands of God and His punishments and they are the
ordinary believers.
(3) Another class are those who have
knowledge of God, His commands and punishments. They are
siddiqs, and God-fear and humility become strong in their
minds. Hazrat Omar said: Acquire knowledge and therefor
acquire tranquillity, gravity and patience. Humble yourselves
before your teacher and let your students do the same before you.
Be not among the proud learned men lest your knowledge
encourages ignorance. There is in a tradition: There are such
good man among my followers who rejoice getting the mercy of
God and weep secretly for fear of His punishment. Their soul is
in the earth but their wisdom is in the hereafter. They walk with
modesty and come close to God through the means of His grave.
Hazrat Hasan Basari said: Patience is the vizier of knowledge,
kindness*its father and humility its garment. Bashr-b-Hares said:
If a man seeks to rule by knowledge, the neamess of God keeps
enmity with him, as he is detested both in heaven and earth.
There is a story that a certain wise man of Banu Israil composed
360 books on wisdom for which he was called Hakim (wise). God
then revealed to his Prophet: Tell so and so, the earth has become
full of your hypocrisy and you have not sought My pleasure
therein. So I accept nothing of it. The man became repentant and
gave it up. He began to mix with the people and roamed in the
streets befriending all the children of Israil and he humiliated
himself. God then revealed to their Prophet: Tell him: You have
now earned My pleasure.
It has been narrated that the Prophet was asked: O Prophet of
God, which actionls best? He replied: To avoid evil and to make
your tongue wet with the remembrance of God. He was asked:
Which companion is best? He replied: The companion who helps
you
He was asked: Which companion
is worst? He replied: The
companion who does not remind you when you forget. If you
remember, he does not help you. He was asked: Who is the most
learned man among the people? He replied: The most learned
man among them
is he who fears God most. He was asked:
Inform us about the best men among us, so that we may keep

86
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
Vol-I
company with them. The Prophet said: Those who remind you of
God whenever they are seen. He was asked: Who are the worst
among men? He said: O God, I seek Thy pardon. They said: Tell
us, O Apostle of God. He said: The corrupt leamed men. The
Prophet said: Those who have been the most God-fearing in the
world will be the most secure in the hereafter. Those who have
wept much in the world will laugh most in the hereafter. Those
who have suffered most in the world will be happiest in the
hereafter.
Hazrat Ali said in his sermon: This is my responsibility and I
am pledged for the following. The crops of nobody will wither if
they were planted with piety. The roots of no tree will get thirsty
if they were raised with righteousness. The most ignorant man is
he who knows not the honour of God-fear. The worst man to God
is one who gathers knowledge from every quarter and yet
remams covered in the darkness of trials. The worst man calls
such a man a learned man, while he has not lived a single day in
learning. He gets up in the morning from sleep and searches for
mcrease of wealth. He goes after greater knowledge
little
knowing that a
little knowledge of right kind
is better than a
great deal of knowledge which detracts man from God. He lives
m doubts and scepticism Iike living in the spider's web and does
never know whether he committed mistake or not.
Hazrat Ali said: When you hear the word of knowledee
remain silent and don't mix it with frivolous talks. It will yield no
fruit. Someone said: If a teacher possesses three qualities
eifts
become perfect on a student, patience, humility and good
conduct. When a student possesses three qualities, gifts become
perfect on
a teacher, intelligence, good manners and keen
understanding. In short the qualities which the Quran mentions
are found in the learned men of the hereafter as they learn the
Quran for actions and not to acquire name, fame, power and
prestige. A certain wise man said: Five qualities inferred from
five verSesof the Quran are the signs of the learned men of the
ereatter, God-tear, humility, modesty, good conduct and love of
the hereafter more than that of the world which is asceticism.
Fear of God is based on the following verse: Of His servants, the
leamed
fear God most (35
: 25Q). Humility
is based on the
followmg verse: They are humble to God and they barter not His
verses for a small price (3
: 198 Q). Modesty is based on the
Vol-I
KNOWLEDGE
|
87
Tollowing verse: And lower your wing for thebelievers (15
: 88Q).
Good conduct is based on the following verse: You have become
gentle
to them on account of the mercy of God
(3
: 153 Q).
Asceticism is based on the following verse: But they to whom
knowledge has been given said: Woe to you, the reward of God is
better for one who believes and does gooddeeds (28
: 80Q).
When the Prophet read this verse:
If God wishes to guide
anyone, He expands his breast for Islam ( 6 : 125), he was asked as
to the meaning of expansion of breast and he .said: This is light.
When it is cast into heart, it expands. He was asked: Has it got any
sigp? The Prophet replied: Yes, to be separate from this world of
deceit, to turn to the hereafter and to prepare for death before it
actually comes.
(10) TENTH SIGN: Another sign of the learned man of the
hereafter is that he studies the leaming of practice and avoids
such leanings as destroy actions, keep mind anxious and provoke
evils. The root of religion is to be careful of evil deeds. For this
reason, a poet said:
I have not known evil for eviTs sake.
I have not known it but to live.
He who is ignorant of the evil of men.
Falls un loit although he is wise.
Hasan Basari was the man whose words had the greatest
similarity to those of the Prophet and whose ways of life nearest
to those of the companions. He was asked: O Abu Sayeed, you
utter such words which nobody knows except you. Wherefrom
have you got them? He said: From Huzaifah, Huzaifah was
asked: You utter such words which no companion heard except
you. Wherefrom have you got them? He said: From the
Messenger of God, He was always asked about good deeds but I
used to ask him about evil deeds, so that I may not fall therein.
The companions were want to ask the Prophet: O Apostle of God,
what are the rewards of one who does such and such good deeds?
I used to ask him: O Apostle of God, what corrupts the deeds? So
Hazrat Huzaifa had special knowledge about hypocrisy.
hypocrites and subtleties of dangers and difficulties.
The natural way of the actions of the learned men of the
hereafter is to make efforts about the different conditions of heart
but
this knowledge
is now rare. Whenever anything of
it
is

88
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
Vol-I
presented to a learned man, he expresses wonder at it and says
that it is the deception of one who beiiev^g sermons. A poet said:
"The true path is one out of many paths.
Very few are so journers to this path.
Their goal is obscure, they are unknown.
Slowly and steadily they march to their destination,
People are indifferent to their goal„
Ignorant also are they of the true path."
It has been said that at Basra there were 120 men of scholastic
theology regarding speech and Zikr but there were only three
men regarding the knowledge of Yeqin or certain faith and the
conditions of soul and secret attributes. They were Sahal Tastari
Shu'bi and Abdur Rahman.
(11) ELEVENTH SIGN: Another sign of the learned man of
the next world
is that he relies on his insight and knowledge
which enlighten his heart and not on books and what he leams
from others. His object of following is what the law giver said
and enjoined. The companions believed blindly what they heard
from the Prophet and they put into it practice. He from whose
soul screen has been removed and whose soul has been illumined
with the light of guidance is an object to be foIIowed and he
should not follow others besides him. For this reason, Ibn Abbas
said: There
is nobody except the Apostle of God whose
knowledge is not sometimes followed and sometimes rejected.
One sage said: We placed in our hearts and in our eyes what we
received from the Prophet. We accepted something of what came
from the companions and rejected something. Their successors
were mere men like ourselves. The companions were superior,
because they saw the circumstances under which the Prophet
had lived and saw with their own eyes the revelation of the
Quran and hence their rank is higher as their minds were imbued
with
it. The light of Prophethood was so strong on them that it
saved them from many sins. They were not satisfied with the
words of others. Their minds were distant from books and
manuscnpts which were not in vogue in their times, nor in the
time of their successors. These books were compiled first in about
120 Hijra after the death of the companions and some of their
successors specially after the death of Hazrat Sayeed-b-
Masayyeb, Hasan Basari and other pious successors. Hazrat Abu
Bakr and one party of the companions did not like to collect even
Vol-I
KNOWLEDGE
89
the Quran in a book form for fear that the people would not
commit the Quran to memory and Iest the people depend only on
this. Then Hazrat Omar and some companions gave advice to put
it in to writing. Thus Hazrat Abu Bakr had the Quran collected in
one book. Ahmed-b-Hanbal was
critical of Malek
for his
composition of Al-Muatta and said: He has done what the
companions did not do:
It has been said that the first books in Islam was written by
Ibn-Juray on dialects of the Quran and historical sayings based
on what he heard from Mujahed, Ata and
the students of
Ibn-Abbas at Mecca. Then Moammer-b-Rashed composed a book
in Yemen on traditions and usages of the Prophet. Then came the
book Mutta of Imam Malek and the Jame of Sufiyan Saori. Then
in the fourth century many books on scholastic theology and
argumentation were written. When the people were inclined to
these books, Yeqin or certain belief began to diminish. Thereafter
the science of heart, research in to the qualities of soul and the
learning of safety from the stratagem of the devil began
to
disappear. Thus
it became the custom to
call the scholastic
theologians and story tellers who embellished their words with
ornamentation and ryhmed prose. Thus the learnings of the next
world began to decrea ’ e.
(12) TWELVTH SIGN: Another sign of the learned man of
the next world is that he saves himself from innovations even
though the people are unanimous on innovations and nove!ties.
He
is rather diligent in studying the conditions of the
companions, their conduct and character and their deeds. They
spent their Iives in jihad, meditation, avoidance of major and
minor sins, observation of their outer conductand inner self. But
th great object of thought of the learned men of the present time
is
to
teach, compose books,
to make argumentation,
to give
Fatwa, to become mutawalli of Waqf estates, enjoy the properties
of orphans, frequent the rulers and enjoy their company.
Hazrat Ali said: The best of us
is one who follows
this
religion.' In short if you follow the companions of the Apostle of
God, no blame will attach you even if you act in opposition to the
people of this age. Hazrat Hasan Basari said: Two innovators
have appeared in Islam, a man of bad judgment who holds that
paradise is for those whose judgment is like mine, and a rich man
who loves this world and searches it. Reject these two. God saved

90
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
Vol-I
the learned man
of
the next world from
these two kinds
of
persons.
The Prophet said: Word and guidance act two matters. The
best word
is the word of God and the best guidance
is
the
guidance of the Prophet. Beware of innovation, because it is the
worst thing. Every innovation is here say and every here say is a
sin. Beware don't think that the end will be delayed. Your hearts
may become hard. Whatever is ordained is impending. Beware,
what has passed will not return. The Prophet said in a sermon:
Blessed is he whose concern for his own faults keeps him away of
finding fault of others, who spends out of his lawful earnings,
keeps company with theologians and the wise and spurns the
sinners and the wicked people.
Blessed
is he who humbles
himself, makes his conduct refined, heart good and does not do
harm to the people. Blessed is he who acts up to his knowledge,
spends his surplus wealth, abstains from superAuous
talks'
follows sunnah and does not introduce innovations.
Ibn Masud used to say: In latter days, good guidance will be
better than many actions. He also said: You are now in an age
when the best of you is one who is quick in doing good deeds, but
soon there will come an age when the best of you will be one who
will be firm in faith and remain silent to ward of doubt. Hazrat
Huzaifa said a more wonderful saying: Your good deeds of this
age are the evil deeds of the past age and the evil deeds of. this age
will be considered as good deeds of the next age. You will be in
good deeds till you know the truth. The learned man among you
will not conceal truth. He said the truth, because most of the good
deeds^ of
this age were reprehensible at the time of the
companions. The good deeds of our age is the embellishment of
mosques, excess in ablution and bath, huge expenses
in
the
construction of buildings for mosques, spreading of soft and fine
rugs in mosques etc. The early Muslims seldom placed anything
f° r their prayer. Hazrat Ibn Masud truly said: You are living in an
age when passion is harnessed Ijy knowledge, but soon there will
come over you a time wherein passion will have priority over
knowledge. Imam Ahmad-b-Hanbal used to say: People have
discarded knowledge and followed strange things. How little is
their learning. God is our helper. Imam Malek said: In past times
j.
people were not in the habit of questioning as they do
j
now-a-days and their learned men did never say that such a thing
|
Vol-I
KNOWLEDGE
91
is lawful and such a thing
is unlawful and the question of
unlawfulness pever arose, as their condemnation of unlawful
thing was open.
Abu Solaiman Darani said: Nobody who
gets any
inspiration for something good should attempt to do it unless it is
|
conformed by a tradition. Let him then praise God for he has got
what was in his mind. When the Caliph Merwan introduced the
custom of a pulpit in the I'd prayer, Hazrat Abu Sayeed Khodri
said to him: O Merwan, is it not innovation? He said: It is not
innovation.
It
is better than what you know. Many people
assembled here.
I wish that my sound should reach them. He
said: By God, you dort't know better than what I know. By God, I
will not pray to-day behind you. He declined to pray behind him
saying that the Prophet used to stand with a stick in his hand at
the time of I'd prayer and deliver sermon.
There is a well known Hadis: Whoever introduces such an
innovation in our religion which is not there is an evil man. There
is in another Hadis: The curs,e of God, angels and all people is
upon one who deceives our people. He was asked: O Prophet of
God, what is the deception ofyour people? He said: God has an angel
who prociaims every day Saying: He who oppresses the religion by
introducing an innovation in opposition to the usages of the Prophet
in relation to one who commits it, is like a man who changes the reign
ofa king in relation to one who opposes his particular order. The latter
crime can be forgiven but there is no pardon of one who changes the
regime. A certain leamed man said: Truth is heavy. He who increases
it transgresses and he who decreases
it
fails and he who keeps
attached to it is satisfied. The Prophet said: Adopt the middle course.
He who goes in advance retards
it and he who remains behind
advances. God says: Avoid those who make their religion a sport and
pastime (6 : 69Q). God says: Have you seen one who considers his evil
as good and it appears to him alright?' What has been introduced as
innovation after the companions and what is unnecessary appertain
to sport and pastime.
These are the twelve signs of the leamed men of the next
world and every quality was found in the learned men of early
ages. Be therefore one of the two. Either be imbued with these
attributes or be repentant after admitting your sins and faults.
But never be the third one, as in that case doubt will arise in your
mind.
If you take the weapons of the world in lieu of religion.

92
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
KNOWLEDGE
93
Vol-I
!
follow the conduct of the transgressors and
if you
take
to
ignorance and refusal of faith, you will reside with those who are
doomed to destru,.Jon and despair.
SECTION 7
INTELLECT AND ITS NOBLE NATURE
The noble nature of knowledge has been revealed through
intellect. Intellect is the source and fountain head of knowledge and
1
its foundation. Knowledge is like the fruit of a tree and it flows from
intellect, or like the light of the sun or like the vision of the eye. Why
should it not be honoured when it is the cause of fortune in this
' world and the next? What is there to distinguish between beasts and
men except intellect? Even a ferocious beast which has got more
|
strength than man fears a man at seeing him as it knows that he may
put him into snare on account of his intellect.
.
For this reason, the Prophet said: Just as the rank of the
Prophet upon his tollowers, so is the rank of an old man over his
people. This is not for his wealth or for his long body or for his
great strength but for his ripe experience grown out of intellect.
For this reason, you find the ignorant near the quarupeds and
they were about to kill the Prophet. But when they saw his noble
countenance, they feared him and there shone on their face the
j
brilliance of his prophethood although it was latent in his soul in
I
the same manner as intellect. My object is to show the honour of
intellect from the Quran and Hadis. Intellect has been termed as
f
Nur or light in the following verse: God is the light of the heavens
and the earth. His light is like a niche etc (24
: 35). He named
benefiting learning arising therefrom as spirit, revelation or life.
God said: Thus I have revealed to you spirit by My command
(42
: 5Q). God said: Have I not given life to one dead and have I not
created light for him with the help of which he can mix with the
people
- 6
: 122? Whenever God mentioned about light and
darkness, He meant knowledge and ignorance. God said: He will
f
take them from darkness into light (5
: 18Q). The Prophet said: O
people, acquire knowledge from your Lord and advise one another
i
with intellect. Know what you have been enjoined and what you
|
have been prohibited . Know that intellect will give you rank to your
S
learning. Know that intelligent man is who obeys God, although his
face is ugly, his body dwarf, his rank low and appearance shabby.
An ignorant man is he who disobeys God though his appearance is
|
Vol-I
beautiful, his body long, his conduct good and his speech fluent.
He who disobeys God is not more intelligent than an ape or a pig.
Don't mix with those who received honour for love of the world
as they are doomed. The Prophet said: The first thing God created
is intellect. He said to intellect: Come near ai<d it came near. Then
He said to
it: Go back and it went back. Then God said: By My
honour and
glory:
I have created nothing
in my
sight more
honourable than you. Through you
I take, through you
I give,
through you I give reward and through you I punish.
Once a party of men were praising a man before the Prophet
and praised excessively. The Prophet asked: How is his intellect?
They said: We shall inform you after seeking his diligence in
prayer and other good deeds. Why do you ask us about his
intellect? The Prophet said: The ignorance of an ignorant man is
more harmful than the transgression of a sinner. On the
Resurrection day, a man will be raisedito the rank of nearness to
God in proportion to his intellect. Tne Prophet said: Nobody
eams a better thing than intellect. It shows him path towards
guidance and saves him from destruction. The intellect of a man
does not become perfect and his religion firm till his faith does
not become perfect. The Prophet said: A man acquires the rank of
praying all nights and fasting all days through good conduct.
The good conduct of a man does not become perfct
till his
intellect is not complete and when his intellect becomes perfect
he obeys God and disobeys his enemy the devil. The Prophet
said: Every thing has a root and the root of a believer is intellect
and his divine service will be in proportion to his intellect. Have
you not heard the words of the sinners in Hell: Had we heard and
understood, we would not have been the inmates of Hell.
Hazrat Omar asked Tamim Dari: What
is the supreme
authority among you? He said:
Intellect. He
said: You have
spoken the truth, I had asked the Prophet as I asked you and he
had replied as you replied. Then the Prophet said:
I asked
Gebrail: What
is the main thing? He said:
Intellect. Hazrat
Bara'a-b-Azeb said: I asked many things to the Prophet. He said:
O people, for everything there is a mainstay and the mainstay of
man is intellect. He who among you learns a thing by proof and
argument
is the best in intellect among you. Hazrat Abu
Hurairah said: When the Prophet retumed from Uhud. He heard
him say: So and so is such and such. The Prophet then said: You

94
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
Vol-I
have got no knowledge about these men. They asked: O Prophet
of God, how? He said: Each man has got rank according to the
intellect 'God' has given him. Their victory and their hope were
in proportion to their intellect. So they reached to their different
ranks. On the Resurrection Day, they will get those ranks
according to their intention and intellect.
The Prophet said: Angels have been eamest and diligent in
their obedience to God through their intellect, while the believers
among the children of Adam have endeavoured to that effect in
proportion to their intellect. He who is more eamest in obedience
of God^s commands is greater in intellect. Hazrat Ayesha asked:
O Apostle of God, for what thing do the people in the world get
excellence over one another? He said: For intellect. I asked: In the
next world? He said: For intellect. I asked him: Will they not get
their rewards in proportion to their actions? The Prophet said: O
Ayesha, do they act except in proportion to their intellect? Their
actions will be in proportion to their intellect and they will get
reward in proportion to their actions.
°
The Prophet said: Everything has got a weapon and the
weapon of a believer
is his
intellect. Everything has got a
mainstay and the mainstay of man is his intellect. Everything has
got a support and the support of religion
is
intellect. Every
people have got a goal and the goal of this peoplje is intellect.
Every people has got a missionary and the missionary of the
worshippers is intellect. Every merchant has got merchandise
and the merchandise of the diligent is intellect. Every amity has
got a permanent house and the basis of the house of Siddias is
intellect. Everything has got a basis and the basis of the next
world is intellect. Everyman has got an offspring to whom he is
as crited and mentioned and the offspring of the Siddiqs to which
\
they are ascribed and mentioned is intellect. Every journey has
got a tent for shelter and the tent of a b'eliever is his intellect. The
Prophet said He who is greatest in intellect among you is most
dearful of God and the greatest observant of what has been
ordered and prohibited even though he does not do much
optional worships among you. The Prophet said: The believer
whctis most load by God is he whose sole goal
is to obey the
commands of God, to admonish His servt®ts,vto complete his
intellect and to admonish himself. He who &Qig£pording to that
f°r the few days of his life gets success and salvation.
VoI-I
KNOWLEDGE
95
TRUTH ABOUT INTELLECT
AND ITS DIVISION
Intellect is a word which has got four meanings.
First Meaning.
It
is an attribute for which man can be
distinguished from other animals. It shows the path to theoretical
leamings on mastering the abstract disciplines. Hares-b-Asad said
in defining intellect that it is a natural attributeby which theoretical
sciences are grasped and understood. It is like a light which falls in
to the heart and helps it to understand things. He who denies this
meaning and
limits
intellect to understand only the necessary
sciences is wrong, as he who is indifferent to the sciences and he who
is asleep are both classed by him in the same rank. They have got this
instinct though they are not leamed. Just as life in them helps them to
move their bodies at sweet will, so also intellect
is so much
intermingled with some men that it helps them towards acquisition of
theoretical leamings. Had it been possible that the natural intellect,
sensation and power of understanding of a man and an ass are equal
with no difference, then it would have been possible that an ass and a
lifeless thing are equal regarding
life with no difference. Just as
according to natural law, an ass has been helped with
life, so
according to natural law, a man and a beast have been differentiated
in the matter of theoretical leamings by intellect. Intellect is like a
mirror which can be differentiated from other things having bodies
by their special attribute regarding form and colour. This special
attribute is a polisher. Forehead can he differentiated from eye as it
has not been given the special quality of sight as in case of eye. As
there is connection of eye with sight, so also there is the connection
of this natural quality of intellect with leaming. Just there
is
connection of sun's rays with sight, so there is connection of Shariat
with intellect with a vigw to express and spread leaming.
Second Meaning: According
to
this meaning, intellect
is
wisdom which appears even in childhood, as a body knows by
instinct that two is greater than one, that and individual cannot
remain in two different places at the same time and that a lawful
thing is not the same as an un)frwful thing.
Third Meaning: Intellect means according to this knowledge
acquired through e^peiiente. Thus he who
is laugh by
experience and schooled by time is called a man of intellect and
he who lacks these qualifications is called ignorant.

96
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
Vol-I
Fourth Meaning: When the natural power of a man reaches
such point by which he can know th result of actions and for
which the present pleasure of sexual passion is controlled, it is
said that he has got intellect. Such a man is called an intelligent
man. Such a man acts not by dictates of passion but by the
ul timate result ofan action.
The first meaning of intellect is its base and fountain-head. The
second meaning is its branch and near the first meaning. The third
meaning is the branch of the first and second meanings. The fourth
meaning is the ultimate result of intellect and distant goal. The first
two arise as natural causes and the latter two are acquired.
Hazrat Ali said:
Knowledge is of two kinds, natural and acquiredy
Acquired knowledge is useless without the other,
Just as the Iightof the sun rendered useless,
When thelightof theeyeisclosed.
The first meaning is understood from the following Hadis.
The Prophet said: God has not created anything more
honourable than
intellect. The fourth meaning
is understood
from the following Hadis: When a man comes close to the doors
of religion and good deeds, he come close to
intellect. The
Prophet said
to Abu Dard'a: Increase
intellect, then your
nearness
to Lord
will increase. Abu Darda's said: May my
parents be sacrificed to you, how will
it be in my case? The
Prophet said: Avoid illegal things prohibited by God and fulfill
the obligatory duties ordered by God, you will then become a
man of intellect. Do good deeds, your honour and fame will
increase in this world and you will gain for that proximity to
your Lord and honour in the next world.
Hazrat Abu Hurairah and others went to the Prophet and
said: O Prophet of God, who is the most learned of men? He said:
The wise. They asked him: Who is the best worshipper among
men? He said: The wise. They asked him: Who
is the most
excellent of men? He said: The wise. They asked him: Is not he the
wise man who
is best in conduct, whose eloquence
is
well-known, whose hand is full of charity and whose rank
is
exalted? The Prophet said: These are the treasures of the life of
the world but the hereafter is for the God-fearing. The wise man
is God-fearing though he is abject and despised in the world.
Vol-I
KNOWLEDGE
97
The Prophet said: The wise man is he who believes in God,
believes in His Prophet as true and obeys His commandments. It
appears from this that intellect is the name of natural instinct. It is
however applied to knowledge as a thing is known by its fruit. A
leamed man is one who fears God, as fear of God, is the fruit of
learning. Thus the word intellect, if applied to any fruit, becomes
like a natural attribute. Knowledge does not come from outside.
It lies under intellect as a natural course. It is like water hidden in
earth. If a well is dug, water comes out of itraricl no new thing is
poured over it. Similarly there is oil latent in almond seeds and
otto in roses. To this effect, God says: When your Lord took out
progency from the children of Adam from their backs and then
took witnesses 'Am I not your Lord' they all said: Yes - 7
: 171 Q.
This means confession of their souls, not verbal promise by
tongue. God says about this matter
:
If you ask theih "Who
created you," they would certainly answer "God" (43
: 87Q). In
other words, their souls will bear witness about it God says; The
natural religion ofGod upon which He created men (30 : 29Q). In
other words, the natural religion of every man is upon a thing
that he should have faith in one God and know the natural
attribute of each thing. In other words, this attribute is latent in
him. So Iman or faith is hidden in the heart of every man.
Yiewed from this angle, men are of two kinds. To one kind of
men Iman was presented but they forgot
it and they are
unbelievers and to another kind of men who cultivated their
souls and remembered it. These people are like those who forgot
a thing after remembering it and afterwards it is reminded to
them. God says for this
: So that they may remember (14
: toQ).
that those with understanding may remember (38
: 28Q).
Remember the gits of God upon you and your convenant with
Him (5
: 10) I have made the Quran easy for rememberance. Is
there any one who will remember it (54 : 17Q)?
Soul is like a horseman and body like a horse. The blindness
of the horseman is more serious and harmful than that of the
horse. The power of intemal insight is more than that of external
sight. Thus God said
: His soul fulfilled not what he saw-53
: 18Q.
And thus I showed Abraham the kingdom of the heavens and
earth - 6
: 75Q. The opposite of inner light and insight is blindness
God says
: It is not the eyes that are blind but the souls which are in
breasts-22:45Q. God says
: He who is blind in the world will be also

98
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
Vol-I
blind in the hereafter. These secrets were revealed to the Prophet,
some through insight and some through sight and both were
called sight. He shose insight is not ripe, acquired nothing but
husk of religion. These attributes are called intellect.
INTELLECTUAL DISPARITY OF MEN
As the lands are of serval kinds, so also there is disparity of
intellect in different individuals by instinct. This disparity of
intellect in different indviduals
is also understood from a
tradition. Abdullah-b-Salam narrated that the Prophet at the end
of a long sermorT described the Throne and stated that the angels
asked God
: 0 God, hast Thou created anything greatter than the
Throne? He said: Yes, intellect. They asked: How great is it? He
said
: Alas, your intellect cannot grasp
it. Can you count the
number of sands? They said
: No. God said
:
I have created
intellect in different minds as numerous as sands. Some men
have been given one grain, some two, some three, some four,
some over one Farq, some one Wasq and some more.
This disparity of intelleft
is found in all
its meanings as
described above except the second, namely axiomatic
knowledge, such as the thing that two are greater than one, that
an object cannot reamin in two different places at the same time
or that a thing cannot be both etemal and originated. Intellect
with reference to the three other meanings is subject to disparity.
With regard
to the fourth meaning of intellect, namely
controlling power, disparity of men 4s clear and evident. For
instance the power of control of appetite and sexual passion is
different in diffefent individuals even it is different in the same
individual at different stage of life. A wise man will be able to
overcome appetite more easily than an ignorant and illiterate
man. A young man may
fail to overcome sexual appetite but
when he grows old, he is able to do it.
The disparity is also due to the differences in knowledge of a
subject. Thus a man having special knowledge of medicines may
refrain from some harmful foods whil a lay man fails to do that
simply because he lacks in medical knowledge. Similarly a
leamed man is more competent to give up sin than an ignorant
man.
-O-
CHAPTER II
SECTION
POUNDATION OF BELIEF
Praise be to God, the Creator, the First, the Last, the Doer of
whatever. He wills, who guides His servants towards the true
path, who makes Himself known
to men that He exists by
Himself without any partner, He is single without any associate,
the Etemal without any before Him and without any beginning,
the Everlasting without any end. He is the First, the Last, the
Extemal and the Internal, the Al-Knowing. The following beliefs
aboutGod is necessary.
(1) To believe in His Transcendence. He is without body
and form, free of restriction, limitation and resemblance, not
divisible. Nothing is like Him and He is not like anytjiing. He is
not Iimited by measure, space and time. He is free frdm diKgence,
rest and change. Everything is in His grasp. He is above Arsh,
above heaven and above everything. He is nevertheless helow
the deepe&t depth. Yet He is near, very close to a thing, nearest td
the jugular vein of a man. He fs not in anything and nothing is in
Him. He is beyond space and beyond time. He is now as He was
before. He expresses Himself through. His creatures and not by
existence. He is free from change, increase or decrease.
(2) To believe in His power and existence. He is Everliving,
Al- powerful, Almighty, fhe great Destroydr. He is free from
faults and failures, slumber, sleep, disease, death. He is the Lord
of the entire universe, angles and of everything. The heavens are
rolled in His hands. He is unique in creation and unrivalled in
ever new creations. He fixed the provision and death of created
being and nothing can escape from His power. His power and
might are above counting.
(3) To believe in His Knowledge. His knowledge is without
limit and He knows everything. Whatever happens between the
deepest abyss of the earth to the highest heaven is within His
knowledge. The smallest atom in the earth or in heaven is not
outside. His knowledge. He knows the creeping of an ant and on
a solid stone in intense dark night or in the movement of a moste
in the air. Everyting open and secret Is within His knowledge
:
Every thought in mind, every contrivance of the devil and every

100
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
Vol-I
thought good or bad is within His knowledge. His knowledge is
eternal and unlimited without any increase or decrease and
without any defect.
(4) To believe in His will. Nothing comes into being small or
great, good or evil, benetitting or not benefitting,
faith or
infidelity, known or unknown, profit or
loss, sin or virtue
without His order, power and will. What He will comes into
being. What He does not will comes not into being. Not a glance
of the eye, not a stray sudden thought in mind is outside His will.
He does what He wills. There is none to rescind His command,
there
is no obstacle
to
it. There
is no refuge of one who
is
disobedient to him. There
is none to follow His command
without His will.
If mankind, jinn, angels and devil want to
remove an atom from its proper place, they won't be able to do it
without His will. His will lies naturally in His attributes which
are unlimited. There is no precedence or subsequence of any
event from its appointed time.
(5) To believe in His hearing and sight. He hears and sees.
His hearing and sight are all pervading. Nothing however scanty
can escape His hearing and nothing however subtle can go from
His sight. Distance is no bar to His hearing and seeing, rather
distance and nearness are all equal to Him. Darkness can not
obstruct His sight. He sees without eyes, cathces without hand
and creates without instrument. His attributes are not like those
of the created beings as His being is not like that of the created.
(6) To believe in His words. God speaks without sound. It is
etemal, ancient and self-existing unlike the talks of the created.
His
talk
is without sound.
It has got no connection with
circulation of
air.
It does not take the help of words and
languages through the movement of lips. The Quran, the Bible,
the Gospel and Psalms are His created books to His Prophets. The
Quran is recited by tongue, written in papers and preserved in
heart, nevertheless it is eternal existing with the etemity of God.
Hazrat Moses heard His words without sound and language and
the righteous will see Him in the hereafter without body and
space.
(7) To believe in His actions. There is no creator of actions
except He and nobody
is outside His judgment. He created
everything in its best of make and form and no other form is
Vol-I
FOUNDATIONOFBE4EF
101
better that in. He is wise in His actions and justin His judgments.
His justice is not comparable to that of men. Whatever exists in
the world, men, jinn, angels devils, heaven, earth, animals,
plants, inanimate things comes out of nothing but by His power.
He existed in eternity by Himself and there was nothing along
with Him. Tereafter He originated creations not because of His
necessity. He has got no fatigue or languor. Whatever He does is
from a sense of justice, not of oppression or injustice. Obedience
to Him
is binding on
all His creatures and He expressed
it
through His Prophets. He gave them miracles and conveyed His
injunctions and prohibitions through them.
(8)
To believe in the other words.
It is to attest to the
prophethood of Muhammad. God sent the unlettered Quraishite
Prophet Mahammad as an apostle to
all the Arabs and
non-Arabs, to the jinn and men and by his law he abrogated all
other laws. He gave him superiority to all other Prophets and
made him leader of mankind and did not make complete any
faith with the words of Tauhid
till
it was followed by the
attestation that Muhammad is His servant and apostle. He made
compusolory to believe whatever he said about this world and
the next world. He does not accept the faith of a man unless he
believes in these articles of faith along with the following.
(a) To believe in Munkar and Nakir. They are two terrible
angles. They will make the dead one sit up with his soul and body
and ask him about his religion and his Prophet. This is the first
examination after death.
(b) To believe in the punishment of
grave as true. (c) to, believe in the Balance with two scales and a
tongue the magnitude of which is like the stages of heaven and
earth. Therewith the actions of men will be weighed. The weight
would be like a mote or mustard seed to establish exact justice.
(d) To believe in the Bridge. It is a bridge stretched ever Hell,
sharper than the edge of the sword and thinner than a hair. The
feet of the unbelievers will slip and they will fall down into Hell.
The feet of the believers will be firm upon it by the Grace of God
and so they will cross
it to paradise.
(e) To believe in the
Fountain. It is a fountain of the Prophet. The believers will take
drink from
it and enter paradise after crossing the bridge.
Whoever will drink therefrom once will never be
thirsty.
Its
water will be whiter than milk and sweeter than honey. There
will be so many pitchers around like so many stars in firmament.

102
Vol-I
Vol-I
FOUNDATION OF BELIEF
103
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
(f) To believe in the judgment. Some will render little account,
some great and some will enter paradise without account. They
will be in the neighborhood of God. Those who believe in Tauhid
will come out of Hell after their due punishment in Hell. (g) To
believe in the intercession of the Prophets then the leamed, then
the martyrs, then the rest of the believers. They will have the
right of intercession in proportion to their ranks to God. (h) To
believe in the goodness of the companions, first of Abu Bakr, then
of Omar, then of Osman and then of Ali. You will have good idea
about them and praise them as God and His Apostle praised
them.
EXCELLENCE OF BELIEP
What has been said above about belief is applicable to a boy
in his early years in order than he may commit them to memory.
Its meaning will be gradually unfolded to him. The first duty of a
>boy is to commit them to memory, then to understand them and
then to believe them and then to know them as certain and sure. It
comes to his mind as a matter of course without proof. The root of
faith of the ordinary people is Taqlid or blind belief on authority.
True it is that the belief which is based on authority, is not free
from some weakness, but when it is certain and sure, it becomes
perfect. To achieve this end, one should not resort to scholastic
theology but to reading the Quran, Tafsir and Hadis and to
understand their meaning because in that case the light of divine
service appears in him, and the advices of the pious, their
company, their character and conduct, their God- fear and their
asceticism spread effect in his mind. Instruction to the boy is like
the sowing of seed in his heart. The above actions are like the
serving of water and tending the seed. It grows, becomes strong
and thrives in to a tree and its root becomes strong and firm and
its branches rise high. The boy should also be guarded against
argumentation and speculation as their harms are greater than
their benefits. To make faith strong by argumentation
is like
striking a tree with an iron matter. To teach by proof is one thing
and and to see proof by eyes is another thing. It the boy wants to
be included within the travellers of the hereafter with Taufiq or
God's grace as his friend, the doors of guidance are opened up for
him till he remains engaged in adtions attached to God-fear and
restrains himself from passions and lusts making efforts
in
discipline and self mortification. Owing to these efforts, a light
from God falls in his heart as God says: Whose strives for Us, We
shall guide them in our paths, for God in assuredly with those
who do right —29:69Q. Tl\at is the most valuable jewel and the
ultimate goal of the saints and favourites of God. That is the
secret matter which rested in the breast of Hazrat Abu Bakr and
for which he was superior to all others. The expression of this
secrecy has got different stages.
Il
will be open
to one in
proportion to ones efforts and strivings and the more one makes
his soul clean and pure. It is like the learning of the mysteries of
medicines, jurisprudence and other science. They differ in
proportion to the differences of intellect and knowledge. As there
is no limit to these stages, there is also no limit to the degrees of
secrets.
—O—
SECTION 3
PROOF OF BELIEF
Iman or belief is founded upon four pillars, each of which has
gottenbases.
(1 ) FIRST PILLAR: It is the knowledge of essence of God and
it is established upon ten bases. They are the knowledge and
belief that God
is existing, eternal, ancient, without form,
without bo&y, without lerigth and breadth, without any special
direction, occupying no space, object of vision of the next world
and He is one without any partner.
(2) SECOND PILLAR:
It
is
to have knowledge of His
attributes and to believe them. It is founded on ten bases—He is
Al- powerful, Al-knowing. living for ever, willing, hearing,
seeing, speaking, eternal in words, knowledge and will and free
from changes of events.
(3) THIRD PILLAR: It is to have knowledge and faith in His
works which are established over ten bases. They are that men's
actions are created, willed and fixed by God, that He is kind to
creatures free from imposing works beyond power of men, that
He punishes men, does what He wills, that there
is nothing
obligatory on Him, that He sent apostles and that our Prophet
was helped by miracles and that his prophethood will last till the
day of Resurrection.

104
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
FOUNDATION OF BELIEF
105
VoI-I
(4) POURTH PILLAR: It is to believe in the things accepted
on authority and it is based on ten things. It is to beiieve in the
truth
of Resurrection, questions by Munkar and Nakir,
punishment of grave, the Balance, the Bridge, Paradise, Hell, the
true Imams, excellence of the companions in accordance with
chronological order and quaIifications of being an Imam.
FIRST PILLAR
The basic principles of faithfor knowledge of God
(1) The first basic principle
is to have knowledge of the
existence of God. The first light which illuminess faith and the
first thing to be followed is the Quran and there is no word better
than the word of God. God says
: Have I not made the earth a
couch, mountains its tents? I have created you of two sexes and
ordained your sleep for
rest. night as a mantle and day for
gaining livelieood.
I created above you seven solid heavens and
placed
therein a burning lamp and
I sent down waters in
abundance from clouds that I night bring forth by it corns and
herbs and gardens thick with trees—78:6. God says
: In the creation
of the heaven and the earth and in the altemation of night and day
and in the ships which pass throught the sea with what is useful to
man and in the rain which God sends down from heaven, giving life
by it to the earth after its death and by sacttering over all kinds of
earth and in the change of the winds and in the clouds that are made
to do service between heaven and earth, are signs for those who
understand
2:159. God says
: Don't you see how God created the
seven heavens one over the other, placed therein the moon as a light
and the sun as a torch and God caused you to spring forth from the
earth like a plant, He will turn you back in to it again and will bring
you forth again
71:14 God said
: Don'tyou see the germof life? Is it
y°u who created it or I? I have decred death among you and I shall
not be overcome to change you forms and create you what you
know not—56:58:
J
It is clear that if he who has got a little intellect and ponders
over these verses and looks to the wonderful creations of the
heavens and the earth will realise that without a great Designer
these workmanships are impossible. The human soul naturally
testifies that God exists and that everything is govemed by His
Laws. For this reason God says
: Is there any doubt about God,
the Creator of heavens and earth (14
: 11) ? The Prophets were
Vol-I
therefore sent by Him to call the people towards monotheism
there is no deity but Got'. They were not commanded to say
: For
us there is one God and for the world another God, because such
a thing was inborn in their minds from the time of their births.
God said. If you ask them who has created the heavens and the
earth they
will reply 'God'. God said
: Turn your face then
towards the true faith, the natural religion whereon God created
men—30:30. There fore there are testimonies of the Quran and
human nature which are sufficient proofs. All other proofs are
unnecessary but still we shall prove by the proof of knowledge
thatGod exists.
PROOF OF KNOWLEDE
A new thing cannot come into existence without a cause.
The would is an originated new thing and it did not come into
existence without a cause. That a thing cannot come into
existence without a cause is clear, for such a thing belongs to a
certain definite time and
it also comes to our intellect that it
comes
at a fixed time without precedence or subsequence,
because of the urgency of its fixed time. The world is a new or
orginated thing. Its proof is found in the fact that it is not free
from motion and rest which are the characteritics of every new
material thing. Even motion and rest are two new orignated
things not free from changes. The world and whatever exists in
it are originated
things. There are three matters in
this
argument. Firstly, a body is not free from motion and rest. It
requires no meditation. Secondly, motion and rest themselves
are originated things. Its proof is that one comes after another.
It is found in all bodies. What is static can move and what is
moving can become static according to the dictates of intellect.
If any of the above two things is predominant over the body, it
becomes a new event. A new thing is originated because of its
emergence an old thing is distant because of its extinction. If
the eternity of
a thing
is established,
its extinction
is
impossible as we shall prove
it by the subsistence of the
creation. Thirdly, what
is not free from changes
is an
originated or new thing or whatever
is not indepedent of
originated things is itself originated. Its proof is that if it were
not so, the world before every new thing may change which
has got no beginning and unless these new things come to
nought, the turn for the-present new things to come into being

106
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
107
Vol-I
would never come. But it is impossible for a thing which has no
end to come to nought.
Another reason
is that
if there
is no end of the motion of
heavenly bodies, three conditions would arise —their numbers
would be either odd or even, or both odd and even or neither odd
or even. The last two are impossible, as positive and negative are
united therein, since the affirmation of one is the negation of
another and negation of one is the affirmation of another. They
cannot be even, as even number comes odd by the addition of
one. That which has no end cannot be even without change. They
cannot be odd, because the number becomes even with the
addition of one. How can it change into odd when its number has
got no end? They cannot be even or odd as it has got no end . From
this, it is concluded that the world is not free from changes and
therefore it is an originated thing. When it is an originated thing,
it requires a Creatorto bring it into existence.
(2) The second basic principle is the knowledge that God is
eternal. He has got no beginning and no end. He is the final of
everything and before everything living or dead. Its proof is this.
If He were an originated thing and not eternal, He would have
need of a Creator who would also have need of a Creator. Thus it
would have continued without end. Whatever comes
in
succession ends in an ancient creator which is the first. For this
reason, the Creator is the First and the Last, the Creator of the
world and its Fashioner.
(3)
. Third basic principle.
It
is
that God
is everlasting
wihtout end. He is the first and the last, the open and the secret.
When the attribute of eternity has been established, his end
becomes impossible. Its proof is this. If He had an end, He would
have remained
in two conditions, either he would come
to
nought by Himself or through an oposing annihilating agent. If it
is possible for a thing which is self-existing to come to nought, it
is also possible for that thing to come into existence. The reason is
that
if a thing requires a cause
to come
to existence,
it also
requires a cause to come to nought. It is not possible that a thing
comes to nought after meeting with an opposing agent. If that
thing which comes to nought is eternal, how does the form of
existence of a thing become?
It
is not also possible. than an
originated thing coming before an eternal thing loses its identity
and existence. God is eternal as we have learnt it from previous
Vol-I
FOUNDATION OF BELIEF
discussions. How then did He exist in etemity with His opposite?
If the opposite is an originated thing, its existence from eternity is
impossible.
(4) Pourth basic principle. It is that God is wihtout form not
occupying any space and free from space, motion and rest. Its
proof is this. Every form occupies a space and moves and stays in
it. Body has got motion and rest which are the characterof
originated things. What is not free from changes is an originated
thing.
If any form
is limited by space and
is eternal,
it
is
understood that the sustance of the creation of the world
is
etemal. If a man says that God has got body and occupies space,
he commits blunder for using such word and not for its meaning.
(5) Fifth basic principle. It is that 'ood is not comoposed of
abody having different substances. When He does not occupy
any space, He has got no body as every body is limited by space
and composed of different substances. The substances of the
body are not free from division, composition, motion, rest, form
and quantity. These are the qualities of an originated thing. If it
were possible to believe that the Creator of the world has got a
body, then it would be possible to attribute divinity of the sun
and the moon and other heavenly bodies. If a dcsigner wishes to
make a body without the substance of body, he will cbmmit
mistake.
(6) Sixih basic principle. God has got no length and breadth
as these are attributes of a body which is an originated thing. Its
Creater exised from before it. So how would He enter in a body as
He existed by Himself before all originated things and there was
nobody along with Him. He is Alknowing, Almighty, Willing
creator. These attributes are impossible for a body. He is not like
any worldly thing, rather He
is ever-living, ever-lasting and
noting is like Him. Where is the similarity of the Creator with the
created, the Fashioner with the fashioned? Hence it is impossible
that anything is like Him.
(7) Seventh basic principle.
It is that God is not confined
within any direction as he created direction, either above or
below, right or left. front or behind. He created two directions for
man, one rests on earth called the direction of feet and one above
his head. What rests above head is above and what rests below
feet is below. To an ant, below the roof, the above portion is
it

108
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
Vol-I
lower side and the lower side is it upper side; though they are
contrary in our case. He created for man two hands, one right
hand and another Ieft. Accordingly there is right hand direction
and the left hand direction. Then there are front direction and
back direction. When direction is an originated thing, how can
He be governed by
that
? Along with the creation of men,
directions have been created. There
is nothing above God^
because He has got no head and the word 'above' is connected
with head. There
is noting below Him as the word 'below'
is
conneted with feet and God has no feet. If He is above the world,
there is a direction opposite to it and every opposite thing has got
a body Kke it or similar to it. But God is free from it. He is unique
He is the Designer.
(8)
Eighth basic principle. It is that
od is soated upon His
Throne, that is upon power. It is not inconsistet with the attribute
of His grandeur and the symptoms of origination and
annihilation. This is what is meant by the foIlowing verse of the
Quran
: Then He ascended
to heaven and
it was then but
smoke—41
: 10. It means his dominion and power as the poet
said :-
r
Bishr has gained power in Iraq.
Without sword and shedding blood.
The people of truth accepted this interpretation as the people
of untruth were compelled to accept the interpretation of these
words of God
: He
is with you wherever you are (57:4). This
means that He encompasses every thing. This is supported by the
following Hadis
: The hea
’ of a believer in is with two fingers of
the Merciful/ meaning within His power or might.
It is also
supported by the following Hadis
: 'The Block stone is the right
hand of God in the earth/ meaning it is established on honour in
the earth. If its meaning is taken literally, the result would be
lmpossible. His taking rest on the Throne means this. If it is taken
literally, it becomes possible to believe that He has got a bod v and
the Throne is also a body limited by space. It is impossible.
(9)
Ninth basic principle. It is that although God is free from
form„ space and direction, He
is an object to be seen in the
hereaffer as He said
: On that day shall faces beam with light
looking towards their Lord—75
: 22. He
is not visible in this
world as God said
: Vision does not comprehend Him, but He
Vol-I
FOUNDATION OF BELIEF
109
I
comprehends vision—6
: 103; also because of the following verse:
|
God addressed Moses saying
: You cannot see Me—7 : 139. 1 don't
understand how the Mutazalites hold that God is visible in this
world also though Moses could not see Him. Insight is a kind of
i
Kashf and knowledge, and Kashf is more clear than knowledge.
When God has got connection with knowledge and not with
direction, He has got connection also with insight without any
direction. As God sees His creation though not in front, the
creation also sees Him though not in fomt. As it is possible to
know Him without modiality or form, it is also possible to see
Him likewise.
(10)
Tenth basic principle. It is that God is one without any
partner, single without any
like. He
is unique in every new
creations, innovations, and inventions. There
is nothing like
Him. The Quran says
: Had there been any other god therein, they
would have gone
to ruin—21
: 22.
If the
first God willed
something, the second would have been compelled to him. This
means that he would have no supreme power. If the second is to
oppose the first, he would be powerful and the first would be
weak rather than an almighty God.
SECOND PILLAR OF FAITH
God's attributes based on ten principles.
(1 ) First basic principle. It is that God is Almighty as He said:
He is powerful over all things—15
: 120. He is truthful as the
world is perfect with His designs and well regulated. He who
sees a garment of silk of which the weaving and texture are fine
and says that it has been made by a dead man or a man who has
got no power, would be lacking in natural intellect and is utterly
foolish.
(2) Second basic principle. It is that whatever exists is within
His knowledge and under His control. Even an atom in heaven
and earth is not outside His knowledge. He is truthful in all His
promises and has got knowledge of everything. This is attested
by the verse
: Does He not know who has created ? He is subtle,
cognisant—77
: 14. Take this proof by your intellect that there is
nothing like of what He created with wonderful design. This
shows the deep knowledge of the Designer and wonderful
intricacies. He is the end of praise and guidance as He described
Himself.

110
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
FOUNDATION OF BELIEF
111
Vol-I
(3) Third basic principle.
It
is
that God
is everyliving,
because it has been established that He has got knowledge and
power and that He has got
life.
If
it were conceived
that a
powerful and knowing designer is without life, then it is possible
also to doubt the lives of animals inspite of their motions and
rest. This is height of foolishness.
(4) Fourth basic principle.
It is that every action happens
according to the will of God. In other words every existing thing
lives according to His will. He is the orignal Creator and repeats
creations and whatever He will,s He does. When every action
happens according to His will, the opposite thing also comes into
being according
to His will.So power leads His
will
ta two
different directions.
(5) Fifth basic principle. It is that God is hearing and seeing
and
it is impossible to evade His sight and hearing. He is the
bridge of mind and lies secretly in thoughts and reflections. The
thinnest sound of the creeping of a black ant on a solid stone in
the deep darkest night does not evade His hearing. How will it
not be when His sight and hearing are perfect beyond doubt and
there is no decrease of this power? How can the power of the
created become perfect in relation to the power of God? How can
a designer become perfect in relation to the great Designer? How
can a por^ion become equal to one whole?
(6) Sixth basic principle It is that God speaks without words
and sounds and letters. It does not resemble the speech of other
beings. In reality His speech is speech of the mind. Just as speech
of mind has got no sound or words, so His speech has got no
sound or words. A poet says>
Speech is of the mind
Tongue is the vehicle of mind.
He who cannot conceive it is a fool. Pay no attention to one
who does not understand that the eternal is that before which
nothing existed. Thus
in the word, 'Bismillah' the word
'B'
precedes 'S' and consequencty 'S' cannot be eternal. God has got
a secret for leading some men astray as He says
: There is no
guide for one whom God misguides—13
: 33. Whose thinks
it
impossible that the Prophet Moses heard God's words which had
no sound or words, it becomes impossible for him to believe that
he will see in the next world such a thing as has got no body
Vol-I
though he understands that a thing can possible by seen which
has got no colour, body or size, even though he has not seen such
a thing. Similarly conceive of hearing what is applicable to sight.
If you understand that God has got knowledge of everything,
understand it also that along with His being, He has got attribute
of speech. Understand also
that
all the words represent His
speech. If it is possible to conceive of the existence of the seven
heavens Paradise and Hell all written in a small piece of paper
and that Taqdir of men is preserved in the minutest part of heart
and seen with an eyeball without the things existing in the eye
ball, it is also possible to concevie of the speech of God as being
read with tongue, preserved in mind, written in paper, but the
essence of speech does not come down on these things, because if
it comes down on paper on account of writing, then the essence of
fire would come down on paper on account of its writing and
would bum it.
(7) Seventh basic principle. It is that the words emanting
from God are eternal along with His attributes, since
it
is
impossible that He is subject ot change. Rather it is necessary that
His attributes should become etemal as His being is etemal. He is
without change and without novelty. He exists with His
attribiutes from eternity. What
is not free from change
is
originated. Origination is an attribute of body as it is subject to
change and the attribute of body is also subject to change. How
can the Creator be sharer with it in the attribute of change? For
this it can be said that He is etemal, His words are etemal but our
words and sounds are new and originated.
(8) Eighth basic principle. It is that His knowledge is etemal.
Whatever occurs in His creation is within His knowledge from
etemity and not his new knowledge. Whenever any animal is
bom, His knowledge about it is not new but etemal and ancient.
For instance, if I know that zaid will come at sun-use, his arrival
at sun-rise and
to welcome him would be owing
to that
foreknowledge and not
for any new knowledge The etemal
knowledge ofGod should be understood in this way
(9) Ninth basic principle. It is that His will is etemal. His will
to make an event at the app&nted time has got connection with
His etemal knowledge, because if there is rise of a new will, it
remains confined to the place of event. If His will rises in another
object and not in His being, He cahhot will just as you can not

112
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
Vol-I
execute an acdon which is not in yourselt. How can you do
it
I
when it depends on the will of another which again depends on
the will of another and so on to infinity and there is no end of it. If
!
it is possible for a will to come into being without another will, it
[
would be possible for the world to come into being without a
will.
(10) Tenth basisc principle.
It is that God
is wise by His
knowledge, living with His Iife, mighty with His power, willing
with his will, speaking with His words, seeing with His light and
|
hearing. These attributes belong to His etemal attributes. If one
\'
says that He is wise without wisdom, his words will be like those
of a man who says that he is wealthy without his wealth, leamed
without his learning and the object of leaming. Leaming, object
j
of leaming and the leamed man are inseparable, as murder
j
murderer and one murdered are in separable. As murder can not
be conceived without the killer and one killed a leamed man
cannotbe concevied without learning and an object of learning.
I
[
THIRD PILLAR OF FAITH
Knowledge of the action of God involving ten principles.
(1
)
First basic principle. It is the knowledge that every event
[
in the world is His action. creation and invention. There is no
}
creator of it except He. He well regulated the creation and gave it
i
its due power and motion. All the actions of His servant are His
creations and keep connection with His power, confirming
thereby His words-God is the creator of everything—9
: 102. God
created you and what you make—37
: 96. Whatever
is your
conversation, hidden or open, He truly knows the innermost
recess of your hearts." "What
! does He not know when He has
created, when He is the subtle, the cognisant" He ordered men to
take precaution in
their actions, words, secret matters and
:
thoughts as He knows the orientation of their actions and gave
proof of His knowledge by creating creations. How will He not
be the Creator of the actions of men when He-has got full power
without any decreae? His power
is connected with the
movements of men. All motions are similar and are connected
with power of God. What then would prevent its connection in
the case of some actions and would not prevent it in the case of
other actions when
all are similar? How could animals be
independent of the Creator when the wonderful workmanship of
spiders, bees and other animals amaze the wisest and intelligent
;
VoI-I
FOUNDATION OF BELIEF
1 13
minds? Who has got power of spaciality in these creations except
God? Then animals themselves donot know of the benefits they
produce. So they cannot be called the cause of workmanship
Now think that all creations bow down to One who is the Creator
of the heavens and the earth.
•
(2) Second basic principle. It is that God being the Creator of
the power of men, does not prevent them from doing volunt3ry
actions by way of acquisition, for God created power and
he
container of power, choice as well as the container of choice.
Power is an attribute of a man though it is the creation of God and
not acquired by man. Motion is also the creation of God and an
attribute of man acquired on the strength of power, because the
power with which he was created is his attribute, but motion is
connected with the attribute of power and for this reason of
connection, it has been named power of motion. The power of
motion is not the result of compulsior on any man as he can move
according
to
his will and knows the difference between
compulsion and volition. How can this motion be his creation
when he does not know the different parts of acquired actions
and
their numbers? When these two matters are disproved,
namely the matter that actions are the result of compulsion and
the matter that they are the result of volition, there remains the
middle position which is this that actions are voluntary in a fixed
manner through power of God by invention and through the
power of a man by acquisition. God has no necessity of keeping
connection with the container of power in the matter of creation
because the power of God is eternal and its connection with the
world is eternal.
(3) Third basic principle. It is the knowledge that though the
actions of man are his acquisitions, they are nevertheless
nr>t
outside the will of God. Neither a twinkling of an eye, nor a
sudden rise of thought in mind in the visible and invisible world
occurs except through His order, power and will. Good or evil,
benefit or
loss, belief or infidelity, knowledge or ignorance,
success or failure, guidance or misguidance, sin or virtue, Shirk*
or Iman come from Him. There is none to reject His command,
none to disobey his decree, He guides whom He wishes and
misguides whom He whishes. There is none to question Him of
what He does, but the people will be questioned (21
: 33). All say
What He' wills occur and what he does not will does not occur.

114
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
Vol-I
|
i
»
God says
: If God willed, He would have guided all men aright
13:30. Had I wished, I would have given every soul its guidance -
31
: 13. He who thinks that God does not will sins and evils as
they are evils and that it is the devil who wills them is cursed.
Tell me how a Muslim can deny the supreme rule of God.
If the
power of a
village chief
is curtaited, he will think
it
dishonourable.
He will think
it derogatory to his position
if
actions are conducted according to the wishes of his enemy in the
village. The result will be that many will be out of his control.
\
Now it is seen that evil deeds are predominant in men.
If every
[
sin is done against the will of God, God's helplessness is seen.
When it is established that all actions ofmen are creations of God,
it follows that the evil actions are also the result of His will.
Question may be asked how God commands to do what He
does not wish and how He prohibits whatHe wishes. In reply we
shall say that command is one thing and will is another thing.
Thus if a master beats his salve, the ruler rebukes the master for
beating his slave. The master shows reason that his slave does
not obey him. As a proof he orders his slave to arrange the bridle
of his horse before the ruler though he knows that the slave will
not obey it. If he does not order him, his objection before the ruler
does not stand and if he wishes that his order should be obeyed it
amounts to his murder. It is impossible.
(4) Pourth basic principle.
It
is that God is generous in
[ \
inflicting trouble on men by His commands.
Neither creation,
nor imposition of obligations is necessary for Him although the
Mutazalites hold that they were necessary for the welfare of men.
But this is impossible since He is the only being to enjoin and
(
prohibit. How will it be limited by compulsion? The object of
compulsion is one of two things, such a work which if given up
will cause harm in future as it is said that it is compulsory on men
I
to obey God who will punish him in the hearafter by the fire of
Hell: or it is to avoid such present harm which is injurious as it is
said that to drinik water for a thirsty man is compulsory so that
he may not die. Secondly it is such a work the negation of which
seems impossible.
Thus it is said that the existence of a thing
which
is known
is necessary because
if
it does not exist,
it
becomes an impossibility.
If
it occurs, knowledge becomes
ignorance.
Vol-I
FOUNDATIONOFBELIEF
115
(5
) Fifth basic Principle.
It is that God can inflict on man
what is beyond his capacity.
It were notpossible, it would have
been impossible for men to pray for removing
it.
The people
prayed
: O our Lord, lay not on us that for which we have no
strength-2:246Q. This is against the belief of the Mutazalites.
(6
) Sixth basic Principle.
It is that God is free to punish a
man inspite of his virtues and to reward a man inspite of his sins.
The Mutazalites hold the contrary view. God has got freedom of
actions among His servants and it is impossible that His servants
will oppose His breedom. Tyranny means to dispossess a man
from his possession but it is impossible in the case of God as He
does not dispossess others in view of the fact that the kingdom of
heaven and earth
is His.
It is proved by this.
Slaughter of
animals
is infliction of pain on animals and men.
Various
tortures inflicted on animals have not been proceded by any
offence or crimes committed by the animals. If it is said that these
animals would be raised up again and awarded for this which is
incumbent upon God, then we would say that every ant killed
under feet and every bug crushed would be brought back to l|fe. -
It would violate the dictates of reason and law as nothing is
incumbent upon God.
(7 ) Seventh basic Principle.
It is that God does with regard
to men what He wills and
it is not incumbent on Him to do
whatever
is good for them.
It has already been stated that
nothing
is compulsory on God but His dealings are not
intelligible to men, because there is nobody to question Hlim
what He does but men are subject to questions. The Mutazalites
say that it is incumbent upon God to do whatever is salutary for
men.
\
(8) Eighth basic Principle.
It is that to have knowledge of
God and to obey His commands are compulsory on men, not on
account of the reason as the Mutazatities say, but on account of
Shariat.
Shariat declared poisonous serpents beyond death,
while reason in realising that what Shariat foretelIs thinks
it
possible and urges that precautions should be taken againstarty
possible punishment.
But reason itself does not lead to that
knowledge of harm.
If a man wams by saying
: A lion stands
behind you, he should at once take to his heels without searching
}
reason.

116
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
Vol-I
(9 ) Ninth basic Principal.
It is that sending Prophets to men
is not impossible. Some say that there had been no use in sending
them, because reason renders
it unnecessary.
This
is
false,
because reason does not support the actions which will lead to
sal vation in the hearatter just as it does not guide them to discuse
the medicines which are useful
for health.
The necessity of
Prohets for men
is like that of the physicians for men.
The
integrity of the physicians
is known by experience and
the
truthness of the Prophets is known by miracles.
(10) Tenth basic Principle. It is that God sent Muhammed as
the last Prophet and as an abrogator of all previous laws of the
Jews, Christians and the Sabians and God helped h.im with opem
miracles and wonderful signs, such as splitting up the moon into
two parts, the praise of the pebbles causing the mute animals
to speak, water flowing from his fingers etc. The open miracle
with which he guided the Arabs is the Quran, as the beauty of
the language throughout the Quran
is unparalleled and the
Arabs could not surpass
it inspite of their eloquence and
rhetoric. Though the Prophet was illeterate and did not learn
how to read and write, yet God informed him in the Quran
about the histories of the previous nations. The informations
which he gave about the previous nations in the Quran being
an illiterate person, the prophecies he made about the future
events and the clue he gave to the unknown things are his
miracles. For instance God says
: You will enter the sacred
mosque if God wills having your heads shaved and your hair
short—48:27. The verse
: The Romans have been vanguished in
a land nearby but after their defeat they will defeat them in a
few years—30:1
. The object of these verses is to prove the truth
of the messenger of God by miracles.
POURTH PILLARS OF FAITH
To believe the Hadis of the Prophet involving
ten basic Principles
(1)
First basic Principle. It is to believe in the Resurrection of
the dead and the Day of judgment as in the traditions.
It is a
Sttled fact like the beginning of our creation. God said
: People
say
: Who shall give Iife to bones when they are rotten? Say, He
shall give life to them who gave them life at first—36:78. The
beginning of creation is the proof of its resurrection. God said
:
Your creation and your resurrection are like a single soul—31:27.
Vol-I
FOUNDATION OF BELIEF
117
Resurrection is the second stage of men and is possible like the
first stage of creation.
(2) Second basic Principle. lt is the question of Munkar and
Nakir which has been mentioned in traditions and therefore to
believe it is compulsory. The second life will be in such a place
I
where he willbe questiond. This
is possible naturally, as the
!
stillness of the dead man's corpse nor its failure to hear the
questions put to it will refute it, bcause a sleeping man is openly
still and dead-like but his soul feels pain and and pleasure at that
time in dream. Its effect can beseen when he wakes up from sleep.
The Prophet used to hear the words of Gebriel and see him but
the men surrounding him did not hear his words or see him. As
God did not give them such power of sight and hearing, they did
not see and hear.
(3) Third basic Principle. It is to believe in the punishment of
the grave as
it have come in Shariat. God said
: They will be
exposed to Me morning and evening and on the Resurrection
Day. The supporters of Pharaoh
will be given severe
punishment—40:49. This
is possible and
to believe
it
is
compulsory. Animals have got special organs to feel pains and
pleasure even though they areeaten by ferocious animals.
(4) Fourth basic Principle. It is to believe that the Balance is
true. God said
: I will set up just balance on the judgment day-
21:48. God said
: Those whose balances will be heavy will get
salvation, and those whose balance willbe light will be losers
— 7:7.
(5) Fifth basic Principle. It is to believe in the Bridge which is
spread on the back of Hell, thinner than a hair and sharper than
the edge of a sword. God said
: Guide them to the bridge of Hell
and tell them to wait there, as they will be questioned—27:23. It is
possible, because He who make the birds fily in the horizon can
take the people to travel on the Bridge.
(6) Sixth basic Principle. It is the belief that Paradise and
Hell have been created by God. God said
: Vie in haste for pardon
of your Lord and a Pradise, vast as the heavens and the earth,
prepared for those who fear God—3
:
127. This provs that
Pradise and Hell are created.

118
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
Vol-I
(7) Seventh basic Prindple. It is to believe that the righttul
Imams after the Prophet are Hazrats Abu Bakr, then Omar, then
Osma, and the Ali and that the ProphePs attention was not upon
any particular Imam. As to the struggle which took place between
Muwayiah and Ali, it was the result of differences of opinion to
discover truth by Ijtehad. Hazrat Muwayiah did not do
it for
leadership. Hazrat Ali considered that the mode of punishment of
the murderers of Osman was to be belated as they got relations in
the army. Hazrat Muwayiah considered that their arrest was better
as their influence might help further blood-shed.
(8) Eighth basic Principle. It is to believe the excellence of the
companions
in accordance with their chronological order in
which they succeeded the Prophet and the real excellence is in
the sight of God and that it did not come to anybody except to the
Holy Prophet. Several verses
to
that effect in praise of the
companions were revealed and there are a number of traditions.
(9) Ninth basic Principle. It is to believe that an Imam, in
addition to his qualifications of his being a Mulsim, mature and
intelligent must have five other qualities—(1) he must be a male,
(2) he must be a God fearing man, (3) he must be learned, (4) he
must be competent, (5) he must belong to the tribe of Quraish as
the Prophet said
: The leaders are from the Quraish. When these
qualities are found in a man, he is fit to become an Iman or ruler
provided majority of the people swear allegiance to him. Those
who oppose the majority of the people are rebels and
it
is
incumbent to bring them under control.
(10) Tenth basic Principle. It is that if a man who is invested
with the.power of rule is found lacking in God fear and learning
and
if there
is fear of distrubance and trouble in case of his
removal, then his rule will stand, because if he is removed, two
conditions will arise. (1) Another man will be reinstated in his
place or the post will remain vacant. In the first case, the harms
which will be caused to* the Muslims in general will be greater
than the harms of one who has got no God fear and learning in
him. The qualties of leadership are for the greater good of the
people.
These four pillar involving forty basic principles are the
articles of belief. He who believes in these things follows Ahle
Sunnat or the people of the ways of the Prophet.
Vol-I
FOUNDATION OF BELIEF
SECTION 4
119
RULES
OF ARTICLES OF BELIEF
This section comprises three questions—(1) significance of
the words 'BelieP and 'Islam', (2) whether belief increases and
decreased, (3) and the meaning of 'belieP according to the early
Muslim sages.
(1) First question. There is difference of opinion regarding
the meanings of Islam and Iman, but there are three questions in
that connection—(a)
literal meanings of the words
(b) their
technical meaning in the Quran and traditions and (c) functions
of the terms according to jurisprudence.
(a) Literal meanings. Iman means belief or corifirmation of
truth. God said
: You have not brought faith in Me—12
: 17,
meaning you do not believe Me as true. Islam means submission
and surrender and avoidance of unbelief, rebellion and
disobedience. Heart is the special seat of Iman or confirmation of
truth and tongue is its interpreter. Islam means submission and
surrender and 'confirmation by tongue. The word Tslam' is more
comprehensive and Tmian'
is a special term. Iman is a part of
Islam. Iman is Islam. but every Iman is not Islam.
(b) The second question relates
to interpretation of the
words Iman and Islam. Shariat used the words in three diffrent
ways both (a) in one meaning, (b) in two meanings, or (c) in two
meanings mixed together. (a) The one meaning is supported by
the verse
: I have taken out the believers who were in the city and
I did not find in it but only one house of Muslims—51
: 35. In fact
there was only one family of Muslims. God said
:O my people, if
you believe God, then put your trust in Him
if you are
Muslim—10:84. The Prophet said
: Islam is built upon five pillars.
He answered
it when questiond about Iman. (b) As to the two
meanings of the words, God said
: The desert Arabs say
: We have
believed. Say, you have not believed, but say
: We have accepted
Islam—49:14. This shows that they surrendered outwardly.
Gebriel once asked the Prophet
: Whatis Iman and what is Islam ?
The Prophet replied in two different meanings. These meanings
are mixed together. Islam is the work of mind, words and actions.
while Iman is an action of mind or to confirm truth by mind.

120
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
Vol-I
(c) the third meaning
relates
to rules of Shariat which
governs the two terms
: One relates to the hereaYter and another
to <this world. The former is to bring out men from Hell fire and
not allow them to remain there forever. The Prophet said
: Whose
has in his heart the belief to the weight of an atom will be brought
out of Hellfire. What sort of Iman is this ? Some say it is inward
belief and some say it is verbal confession. Some say it is actions
according to Islam.
It is again said that he who combines in
himself all these three elements will be taken out of Hell. With
regard to the second element, a man will also be taken out of Hell
although he committed some major sins. He is called Fasiq or a
great sinner. The third element is confirmation of faith by mind
and attestation by tongue but not followed by action. Regarding
confirmation of truth by mind at death before verbal confession
by tongue, such a man also will betaken outof Hell as the Prophet
said: He who has an atom of belief in his heart will be taken out of
Hell. Regarding verbal confession by tongue of Kaleima
Shadadat but not confirmation by mind, there is no doubt that
such a person will remain forever in Hell.
(2) Second question. Iman
is subject
to increase and
decrease. It increases by good deeds and decreases by evil deeds.
There is existence ofa thing which has got increase or decrease
and nothing grows or diminishes of itself. So there is existence of
Iman which increases by good deeds and decreases by evil deeds.
God says
: He increased
their belief God says
: In order
to
increasse their belief along with their belief. The Prophet said
:
Belief increases and decreases. This law is applicable to every
attribute of mind. Mind appertains to the unseen spiritual world
and the actions of organs appertain to this world. There is subtle
tie between these two worlds and some men think that the two
worlds are the same. He who has seen both the worlds perceived
the real nature of things. This is the first meaning. Regarding the
second meaning of increase and decrease of belief, the Prophet
said
: Belief has got more than seventy branches. He also said
:
When a fornicator fornicates, he ceases to be a believer at the
time. So there
is action along with belief which shows that
it
increases and decreases. Regarding its third meaning, it is sure
and certain belief which can be seen by Kashf, expansion of
breast and deep insight. Mind is not satisfied till it has got faith
like the fact that two is more than one, that fireburns and that the
world is created. So this is-the highest stage of belief after increase.
VoI-I
FOUNDATION OF BELIEF
121
[|
(3) Third question
It is with regard to the answer
I am a
[j
believer
if God
wills
f on a question put to one—"Are you a
believer"? The reply should»not be "I am a true believer or I am
abeliever to God". These qualifications are correct or put forward
for four reasons, two of them come from doubt and two donot
come from doubt. The first reason which does not come form
doubt is the care taken for fear of showing oneself pure. God
says: Don't inpute purity to yourseIf. God says
: Have you not
seen those who hold themselves to be righteous 4
: 52? A certain
wise man was asked
: What is detestable talk ? He said
: To prasie
oneself. The second reason for the use of these qualifications is
courtesy and to entrust all actions to the will of God. God says, by
way of instruction to the Prophet (18
: 23): Don't say of anything
'I will do
it tomorrow' without saying if God wills.' The thjrd
meaning keeps connection with doubt when one says
: I am a true
believer if God wills. There is doubt whether the man is a perfect
believer because God
said: True believers are those only who
believe in God and His Apostle and afterwards do not dotibt and
who fight with their lives and properties for the cause of God.
These are the truthful—94
:
15.
It has been expressed also in
verses—2
: 172, 58:12, 57
: 10. The Prophet said
: Belief has got
seventy branches. The fourth reason arises also from doubt. It is
the fear of bad end, for no one knows what will be his end, good
or bad.
These are therefore the different reasons for qualifying
answer to the question
: Are you a believer ?
—O—

VoI-I
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
123
CHAPTER III
MYSTERIES OF CLEANLINESS
1
The Holy Prophet said
: Religion is founded on cleanliness.
He said
: Cleanliness is the key to prayer. God said
: Therein there
are men who love purity and God loves the pure—9:109. The
Prophet said
: Cleanlines
is one half of belief. God said
: God
desires
to make you clean and
to complete His favours on
you—5:7.
j
Those who possess insight understand by these sayings that
the most important thing is the purification of the heart. If the
tradition 'cleanliness
is one half of faith is limited only to the
external cleanliness of physical organs by water and not alsodo
the purification of the heart which may entertain evil designs and
• thoughts, its meaning then will be distant and it is impossible.
PURITY HAS GOT FOUR STAGES
(1) The first stage is the purification of the external organs
from excrements and
filths.
(2) The second stage
is the
purification of the bodily organs from sins and faults (3) The
third stage is the purification of the heart from evil traits and evil
vices.
(4) The fourth stage is the purifications of the innerself
from everything except God. This is the stage of the Prophets and
the saints. Every item of cleanliness is half of action, because the
object of the actions is the glorification and greatness of God. In
realjty God's knowledge
is not attained unless the heart
is
purified of all things other than God. For this reason, God said
:
Say 'God' then leave them
to play in the useless falks—6:91.
There can be no two things in mind at the same time and God also
has not created two minds in the same man. The object of the
actions
is to adorn the mind with praiseworthy cjualities and
religous firm faith.
It is well known that the mind will not be
adorned with those qualities till the blameworthy evils and false
faithreigninit.
To purify the mind from these evils comprises half of its
actions and the first half is pre-requisite for the second. In tbis
sense, purity is said to be half of belief. So to purify the bodily
limbs from the prohibited things is the first half and to strengthen
it with religous acts
is its second half. These are the stages of
belief and every stage has got its rank. Nobody will attain a
higher stage unless he first goes through the lower one. He can
attain real purity of heart till he purifies it from the blameworthy
vices and adorn
it with the praiseworthy qualities. He can't
purify the heart till he purifies his organs from prohibited things
and makes it firm with religous acts. The more honourable is the
object, the more difficult is the attainment of that object. The
longer is the road that leads to it, the greater are the obstacles.
Don't think that this can be attained with ease and without
efforts. He who
is blind to these stages of purity will not
undersand the above mentioned four stages. He will understand
the lowest stage of cleanliness. It is like the outer husk of a crop or
like skull in relation to brain. He understands that the outer
cleanliness is the desired object and makes exaggeration in it and
spends much time and wealth in abstersion
(Istinja), in
cleanliness of cloth, body and in the use of water and thinks that
the noble puity comprises these outward and external
cleanliness. The early Muslims concentrated
their entire
^ttention and energies on the puification of their hearts and were
lenlent in their outward cleanliness. Even Hazrat Omar, being
placed in a high position, made abbution with the water from a
jar which belonged to a Christain woman. The companions were
accustomed not to wash their hands after eating from the
remains of fat and food but to wipe them out against the arches of
their feet and regarded the use of soap as innovation. They used
to say prayer kneeling and prostrating directly on the ground in
the mosque and walk barefooted on the roads. They used to use
pebbles after calls of nature.
Abu Hurairah and some immates of Suffa said
: We ate meal
ancl when the prayer time came, we wiped our fingers against
thepebbles and proceeded to say prayer. Hazrat Omar said
: We
did not know the use of soap at the time of the Prophet and the
hollows of our feet were, our towels. It is said that the first four
innovations after the Prophet were the use of sieves, soap, tables
and eating to satiety. The efforts of the companions were towards
the purification of the heart to the extent that some one among
them said
: It is better to say prayer with shoes than without shoes
because when the Prophet look off his shoes with uncleanliness
at the advent of Gabriel, the companions also took off their shoes.
He told them: Way have you taken off your shoes? One of them
named Nakhyi said
: Perhaps someone in need may pass by and

124
MYSTERIES OF CLEANLINESS
Vol-I
take these shoes. In tact, they walked barefooted, sat on the mud
and sand, prayed directly on the floors of the mosque. They used
to eat bread of coarse wheat which the animals trod with their
feet and sometimes polluted with their urine. They made no
efforts to avoid small impurities.
These things have now changed. The people termed
cleanliness for ironed cloth and say that it is the foundation of
religion. One group spend
most of their times in beautifying
their bodies just like a new bride but their minds are full of evil
thoughts, pride, self conceit, ignorance, show and hypocrisy. He
who cleanses with-stones after calls of nature, walks barefooted
in mud, prays in mosque on the floor, walks on the rugs without
leather over shoes or makes ablution with water belonging to an
old woman, is attacked furiosu!y and he is termed as impure.
The following are three matters of external purity—(1)
purification from impurities, (2) purification of the body from
excrements and
(3) purification from bodily growths. such as
pairing of nails, cutting off hairs, circumcision, removal of the
hairs of pubes and the like.
SECTION
PURIFICATION FROM IMPURITES
There are three matters in this, the things to be removed, the
means of removal and the meaning of removaI. That which shall
have to be removed is of three kinds inanimate objects, animate
objects and parts of animate objects. As to inanimate objects, all
are pure except wine and intoxicating things. As
to animate
objects, all except dogs and pigs and their young ones are pure.
when an animal dies, it becomes impure except five-locusts, fish,
worms in foodstuffs, dead animals which have no flowing blood
like flies, beetles and the like. Asto purity from inanimate objects,
it is of two kinds, the first is wha t is cut off from an animal and its
law is the same as that of dead bodies. Hair is not impure. Bones,
however, become impure after death. The second
is what
is
changed after entering into body. They are
all impure. What
emits from the body not after change is pure, such as sweat and
tear. Things which have a fixed seat and are subject to change are
impure. such as saliva, mucus of nose except the seedof of life like
Vol-I
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
125
semen, eggs. Blood, pus, feces, urine are impure. Nothing
is
exempted of these impruites except five things (1) the remains of
odour after abstertion with pebbles are exempted, (2) whatever
cannot be avoided, such as mud in the streets and the dust of
dung inspite of their impurity is exempted, (3) what is attached
to the leather socks of impurites of the streets is exempted after it
has been wiped against earth. (4) the blood of fleas and the like
little or much on shirt is exempted except when it goes beyond
the oridinary limits. (5) and the blood of itches and pimples is
exempted.
THE MEANS OF REMOVAL OF IMPURITIES
The means of removal of impurities are either condensed or
liquid things. The condensed or solid things are pebbles of
abstersion. Pebble purifies it if it is itself pure and dried. It should
be hard, pure, dry and free from illegality. Liquid thing is water
with which impurities are cleansed. Only pure water can remove
impurities. The water, when mixed with impure thing and
changing not its colour is pure, but if its colour taste and a<Lour
are changed, it becomes impure. The Prophet said
: When water
is sufficient to fill two pitchers, it carries no impurities, if less, it
carries impurities and does not remain pure. This is applicable in
case of stagnant water.
If flowing water mixes with impure
things and does not remain pure. This is applicable in case of
stagnant water. If flowing water mixes with impure things and
becomes changed, itbecomes them impure.
Some incidents together with urgent need and necessity
strengthen the belief that only change in water was.taken into
consideration by the Prophet. The following words of the
Prophet support
it
: Water was created pure and nothing
makes
it impure except that which changes its colour, taste
and smell.
MANNER TO REMOVE IMPURITIES: If the impurity
is
not a matter of touch, it is sufficient to run water over all its parts.
If the impurity
is physical,
it should be removed.
If its taste
remains, it indicates the peftistence of the physical matter. The
same is true of the persistence of colour. If it sticks, it is exempted
provided itis thoroughly rubbed. If taste persists, the persistence
of its physical matter is perceived.
I

126
MYSTERIES OF CLEANLINESS
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
127
Vol-I
SECTION 2
PURIPICATION OF BODY FROM EXCREMENTS
It comprises abstersion, ablution, bath and purifiaction with
sand. We are now stating the manner of their performance in the
prescribed order. The following are the rules of answering the
calls of nature. If one is pressed by calls of nature, he should go
from the view of men and take shelter behind something. He
should not uncover his private parts before he sits down and
should not face or keep back Ka'ba sun or moon but there is no
harm when he is within a room. He should not sit in a meeting
place of the people, urinate in stagnant water, under a fruit tree,
or in a hard surface and windy place, He should sit on his left leg.
When entering a room, he should advance his left leg first and
then his right leg and should not urinate while standing. Hazrat
Omar said
: While I was urinating standing, the Prophet told me
O Omar, don't pass urine standing. Hazrat Ibnul Mobarak said
:
There is no harm in urinating in abathroom if the water goes out
flowing. The Prophet said
: Let nobody among you urinate in a
bathroom and then make ablution as many machinations come
from it. None should take with him anything which contains the
name of God or His Apostle. On entering rodm, he should say
: I
seek refuge to God from the accursed devil, the
filthy, they
impure, the abominable, the pemicious. On leaving it, he should
say
: All prise is due to God who has removed from me what was
harmful to me and left for me what is useful. Before sitting, he
should take pebbles with him. He should not wash his private
part with water in the first place. He should take utmost pains in
cleansing his penis from urine by shalking
it to and for three
times. Hazrat Salman said
: The Prophet taught us everything
even how to cleanse after calls of nature. He prohibited us to clear
with bone, or dung or face the Ka'ba.
MANNER OF ABSTERSION
He will perform abstersion wtih three stones. If the orifice is
cleansed there with,
it is good and
if not more stones may be
used. The Prophet said
: Let one who uses stones use odd
numbers. He shall take stones in his left hand, place it in the fore
part of his orifice and run it over with horizontal and circular
motions to the rear part. Thus it will continue from the rear part
to the fore part. Taking the third stone, he should run it around
Vol-I
the orifice. He should then move to another place and perfrom
the act of abstersion with water. At the end of abstersion, he
should say
: O my God, purify my heart from hypocrisy and
make my private part pure from indecencies. he should then
wipe his hand against earth or wall
till odour
is removed
therefrom. The use of stones and water are both desirable. It is
related that when God revealed the verse (9
: 109)
: "Therein are
men who love purity and God loves the pure/ the Apostle of God
said to the people of Quba
: What is the purity for which God has
praised you ? They said
: We are accustomed to use both stones
and water after calls of nature.
MANNER OF ABLUTION
He shall commence with the use of tooth stick. The Prophet
said
: Your mouths are the pathways of the Quran. Cleanse them
therefore with stick. The Prophet said
: Prayer after the use of
tooth stick is better than prayer without its use by seventy five
times. He said
: Had
it not been difficuits for my followers,
I
would have ordered them to use tooth stick before every prayer.
He said
: Why should
I not see you with yellow teeth ? The
Prophet was accustomed to use tooth stick several times every
I
night. Hazrat Ibn Abbas said
: The Prophet has so repeatedly
j
;
commanded us to use tooth stick that we thought that soon a
I
revelation would come for its use. The Prophet said
: Use tooth
stick, as it purifies the mouth and please God. Hazrat Ali said
:
?
Use of tooth stick increases memory and removes phlegm. The
j
companion of the Prophet used to keep tootch stick in their ears
even at the Hme of journey.
I
lt is desirable to use the tooth-sHck before every prayer and
f
every ablution, before and after sleep, after eating anything of
1
unpleasant smell. After the use of tooth-srick face the Ka'ba for
abluHon and then say
: In the name of God, the Merciful, the most
Compassionate. The Prophet said
: There is no ablution for one
who does not take the name of God, that is complete ablution. He
should then wash his hands three Hmes and should say
: O God, I
ask Three for luck and blessing and seek refuge to thee against
,
ill-luck and destruction. He shall rinse his mouth thrice with
water and say afterwards
: O God, help me to read Thy Book and
glorify Thy name. Then he shall take up water and cleanse his
nose thrice and say
: O God. grant me to enjoy the fragrance of
pardise while Thou art pleased to promise it with me. At the time

128
MYSTERIES OF CLEANLINESS
(
Vol-I
of throwing dust from nose, he should say
:
I seek refuge to
These from the stench of Hell and from the evil of the world.
He will then wash his face thrice from ear to hearand from flat
portion of head to the fore part of the chin. As he washes his
face, he should say
: O God, make my face white and bright
with Thy light on the day when Thou will make the faces of
Thy friends bright. He should then wash his arms upto the
elbows
three
times. The believers
will come on
the
Resurrection Day with brightness on
their foreheads, writs
and ankles from the effect of abluHon. The Prophet said
:
Whose is able to cleanse the fore part of his head, let him do so.
He should then wipe his head by soaking his hands in water.
Thrice he should do
it and say
: O God, cover me with Thy
mercy and shower upon me Thy blessings. He shall then wipe
his ears both outside and inside with fresh water thrice. He
should then wipe his neck with fresh water because the
Prophet said
: Wiping the neck from behind will save one from
breach of trust on the Resurrection Day. Then he should wash
his right foot thrice and left foot thrice. When he will finish
ablulion thus, he should raise his head towards the sky and say
:
I testi fy that there is no deity but God. He is one and there is
no patner for Him. I testify also that Muhammad is the servant
and Apostle of God.
There are several undesirable things in ablution—to wash
each limb more than three times. The Prophet said
: Whoever
goes beyond three times transgresses. He said
: soon there will
appear among my people those who will exaggerate in ablution
and invocation.
EXCELLENCE OF ABLUTION: The Prophet said
: Whoever
makes ablution well and prays two rak
rats of prayer in such a
way that nothing of the world occurs in his mind, goes out of his
sinsin such a manner that he comes out as it were from the womb
of
mother. The Prophet said
: Should I not inform you what
atones sins and raises ranks ?—performing ablution in distress,
to step towards the mosques <**d to wait for the next prayer after
a prayer. This the "bond". He repeated it three times. The Prophet
said after washing each limb: God does not accept prayer except
this ablution. He performed ablution after pouring water twice
on each limb and said
: God will reward him twice. He performed
ablution of each limb thrice said
: This is the abluation of the
Vol-I
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
129
Prophets before me and of Abraham. The Prophet said
: Whose
remembers God at the time of his ablution, God purifies his
whole body and he who does not remember God, is not purified
except those places where the water was applied. The Prophet
said
: Whose makes ablution after ablution, ten merits are
recorded for him. The Prophet said
: Ablution after ablution is
like a light. The Prophet said
: When a Muslim in ablution rinses
his mouth, the sins come out of his mouth. When he blows his
nose, the sins come out of his nose. When he washes his face, the
sins fall down from his face, even from his eye brows. When he
washes his two hands, the sins fall down from his two hands,
eyen from be neath his finger-nails, when he wipes his head, the
sins comes out of his head, even from his two ears. When he
washes his feet, the sins come out of his feet, even from beneath
his toes. Then he goes to the mosque and prays. Those become
additional. There
is
in another tradition
: One who makes
ablution is like a fasting man. The Prophet said. Whose performs
ablution well and then says looking to the sky
: I testify that there
is no deity but God and He has no associate and
I testify that
Muhammad
is the Apostle of God, eight gates of Pardise are
opened up for him and he will enter therein through whichever
gate he wishes.
MANNER OF BATH
One shall place the vessel with water to his right and then
after taking the name of God wash his hands thrice and remove
any impurity he has from his body. He shall then perform
ablution in the manner already described with the exception of
washing of feet. He shall then pour water on his head thrice, over
the right side thrice, over his left side thrice. He shall then rub his
body infront and back including beard and
hairs. He
is not
required to make ablution after bath provided he has performed
it before bath.
Bath
is compulsory in four cases, in case of emission of
semen, in case of copulation, after masturbation and after
child birth. Other baths are sunnat, such as baths on two I'd
days, Friday, at the time of Ihram, at the time of waiting at
Arafat, at the time of entry into Mecca, on the last three days of
pilgrimage, at the farewell circumbulation, at the time of
conversion
to Islam,
after recovery from swoom and
after
washing a dead body.

130
MYSTERIES OF CLEANLINESS
Vol-I
MANNER OF TAYAMMAM
The manner of purification with sand is as follows. If the use
of water does harm to a person, if water is not found on search, or
if there is danger in reaching the place of water such as fear of
ferocius beast or fear of enemies, or
if the water is even
insufficient to quench thrist, or if the water is in possession of
another and the price is high, or if he is ill, or has got wound and
water will do harm, then he should wait
till the time of
compulsory prayer comes. He should then proceed to use pure
soil with intention of Tayammam. He should put his right palm
over the sandy soil and lift it to his face, wipe it and intend to
observe prayer. It should be done only once. Then he shall again
place his left plam over the sand and wipe his right hand and
then place his right hand to the elbows over the sand and then
wipe his left hand up to the elbows. By this Tayammam, only one
prayer at a time can be done.
SECTION 3
CLEANSING THE EXTERNAL BODILY GROWTHS
AND DISCHARGES
These are of two kinds, the discharges and the wet excretions
of the body and bodily growths. These excretions are eight in
number.
(1) That which attaches to the hairs of head such as dirt and
lice should be removed by washing, combing and the use of
ointment. The Prophet used to oil his hairs and comb them on
every alternate days and ordered his followers to do the same.
The Prophet said
: Oil your hairs on every altemate days. He also
said
: Let one honour his hairs. It means
: Keep them clean of fi!th
and arrange them. Once a man came to the Prophet with
dishevelled hairs and fuffled beard and he said
: Has he got no oil
wherewith to arrange his hairs ? Then he said
: One of you comes
as if he is a devil. (2) Filth which collects in the holes of ears. This
filth should carefully be caleansed. (3) Filth in the nose should be
removed by inhaling and exhaling. (4) The filth which collects
the beard should be removed and the beard should be combed.
There is a well known tradition that the Prophet either at home or
between the teeth and the tip of the tongne should be removed by
tooth stick and the rinsing of mouth. (5) Filth which attaches to
Vol-I
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
131
m journey never parted with his tooth stick, comb and mirror.
Hazrat Ayesha said that the Prophet said: God loves a man who
he goes out t0 meet with Ms brethren.
1r™e f,hh wh
j
ch co,lects i« ^nger joints should be removed and
the Prophet ordcred his followers to cleanse them specially after
eating. (7) The filth which collects in nails of ringers should be
remoyed
The Prophet ordered that the manicuring of nails,
p ucking the hairs of armpits and shaving the pubes should be
.
°nee
f^
ery forty <iays. Once reveIation stopped coming to
the Prophet. When Gebrail came to him, he asked him the reason
and Gebrail said
: How can revelation come to you when you
have not cleansed the filth from your knuckls and nails and filth
of mouth by toothsHck? (8) Filth of the whole body collected
rough perspiration and dust of path ways should be removed
by bath. There is no harm to enter public bath room for that.
SECOND KIND OF FILTHS
*
These are bodily growths and are of eight kinds. (1) Hairo of
head. There is no harm in shaving the hairs of head for one who
desires
to be clean and there
is no harm in keeping them
provided he oils them and keeps arranged and combed. (2) Hairs
m?«sfeche. .The Prophet said
: Cut off your moustaches, in
another naration, spare your moustaches. In another naration
tnm your moustaches and spare your beards. In other words
let
your moustaches extend to the upper lip. Shaying of moustaches
was never mentioned in the tradition, while trimming so closely
as to resemble shaving has been narrated by the companions.
ere lsno harm in leaving the ends of moustaches to hang
down. The Prophet said
: Cut off your moustache along a tooth
stick. The Prophet said
: Spear the beard and let it grow. The
Prophet said
: Do the opposite as the Jews used to spare their
moustaches and trim their beards.
(3) Hairs of armpits should be removed once every forty
days either by plucking or by sha ving (4) Hairs of pubes should
be remoyed once every forty days either by shaving or by the use
of a depilatory. (5) Nails should he manicured because of their
ug!y appearances and also because of the dirt which collects
underneath them. The Prophet said
: O Abu Hurairah, manicure
your nads as the devil sits therein when they are Iong. (6—7)
Navel cord and foreskin of genital organ. The naval cord is cut
off at the time of birth of a child. The Prophet said
: Circumcision

132
MYSTERIES OF CLEANLINESS
Vol-I
is sunnat for a male and meritorious for a female. Excess should
be avoided in the case of a female. The Prophet said to Omme
I
Atiyyah
: O Omme Atiyyah, be moderae in circumcision and cut
?
off only a small portion of ditoris, for it is better to preserve
|
feminity and more welcome to masculinity. (8) Length of beard.
There are differences of opinion regarding the length of the
beard. Some say that it is to be kept up to the grip and there is no
harm in cutting beyond the grip. Hazrat Omar and some
Tabeyins used to do
it. Hasan Basari and Qatadah said that to
spare it to grow long is better as the Prophet said
: Spare your
beards. It has been said that the bigger the beard, the smaller the
intellect.
There are ten undesirable practices regarding beard. These
are dyeing the beard black, bleaching it with sulpher, plucking it,
plucking the grey hairs, trimming
it, augmenting
its
size,
keeping it dishevelled, combing it for show of people, making it
black for show of youth, making it grey to attract honour and
dyeing it red or yellow. Dyeing it with black colour is prohibited
as the Prophet said
: The best or your youths is he who follows the
old among you and the worst of your old is he who follows the
youth among you. The Prophet said
: Black dye is the sign of the
inmates of Hell. The first man who used black dye was Pharaoh.
The Prophet said
: There will appear in latter ages people who
will dye their beards black like the peak of pigeons. They will not
get the fragranc eof Paradise. Dyeing the beard yellow or red is
j
permitted. The Prophet said
: Yellow is the colour with which the
Muslims dye their beards and red is the colour with which the
|
believers dye their beards. Henna can be used for red dye and
|
saffron and phillyrea for yellow dye. Bleaching the beard with
|
sulpher to give the appearance of advanced age
to attract
venration and to have their testimony accepted is undesirable. To
shave beard is Makruh or undesirable. So also plucking grey hair
because the Prophet prohitited it as it is a light for a believer.
CHAPTER IV
PRAYER
Prayer is the pillar of religion and safeguard and root of
religious belief the chief of religious actions. The chapter
is
divided into seven sections.
SECTION
EXCELLENCE OF PRAYER
EXCELLENCE OF AZAN: The Prophet said
: Three
persons will remain on the Resurection Day on the mountain
of black musk. They will have no fear of account and they
will have no anxiety till they become free from what is near
men. (1) One who recites the Quran to seek the pleasure of
God and leads the prayer of the people who remain pleased
with him.
(2) One who proclaims ^zan
in a mosque for
pleasure of God and call the people towards the path of
God. (3) One who is given trouble in the world regarding
his livelihood but does not give up the actions of the next
world in searching it. The Prophet said
: If a man, jinn or
anything hears the Azan of a Muazzen, he will testify for
him on the Resurrection day. The Prophet said
: The hand
of the Merciful remains on the head of a Muazzen
till he
finishes his Azan. God says
: If a man calls towards God
and does good, who is better than him in preaching ? This
was
yrevealed regarding a Muazzen. The Prophet said
:
When you hear Azan, say what Muazzen says. Say at the
time of Haia-alas-salat "There is no might; and strength
except through God." When he says
: prayer has begun,
say
yMay God establish the prayer and keep its tongue so
long as the heaven and earth exist. When at the time of
Fajr prayer
it is recited 'prayer is better then sleep', say
'you have spoken the truth, you have spoken good and
given admonition/ Say when the Azan
is finished
: O
God, Lord
of
this perfect invitation and ever living
prayer, grant position, means and honour to Muhammad
and raise him up to the of glory which Thou hast promised
him."

134
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
Vol-I
EXCELLENCE OF COMPUSLORY PRAYER
God says: Prayer
is compulsory on the believers at the
appointed times. The Prophet said
: God has made compulsory
for His servants prayer for five times. If a man observes them and
does not Ieave anything out of their duties, there is covenant for
him from God that He will admit him in paradise. If a man does
not observe them, there is no covenant from God for him. If He
wishes, He may punish him and if He wishes, He may admit him
in paradise. The Prophet said
: Prayer five times is like a flowing
canal of pure water by the side of one's houes. He takes bath five
times daily in
it. Will you see any impurity in his body ? They
said
: No. The Prophet said
: As water removes impurities, so
prayer for five times removes sins. The Prophet said: Prayer for
five times expiates the sins of a man till he does not commit major
sins. The Prophet said
: The distinction between us and the
hypocrites
is our presence at morning and night prayers and
their absence at these two prayers. The Prophet said
: If a man
meets God after destroying his prayer. God will not look towards
;
his virtues. The Prophet said’: Prayer is the pillar of religion. He
who gives it up destroys the pillar. The Prophet was once asked
:
Which action is best ? He said
: To pray at the appointed times.
The Prophet said
: If a man protects his prayer for five times with
full ablution and at appointed times, these will be proof and light
for him on the Resurrection Day. He who destroys his prayer will
rise with Pharaoh and Haman.
The Prophet said: Prayer is a key to paradise. He said
: God
has not made anything compulsory dear to Him for this servants
after Tauhid than prayer. Had there been anything better than it,
he would have fixed it for the angels. They took from Him the
organs of prayer. Some make bow, some prostrate, some stand,
some sit. The Prophet said
: He who gives up prayer intentionally
becomes an infidel. In other words, he becomes near coming out
of faith as his firm tie becomes loose and his pillar falls down just
as when a man comes near a town it is said that he has reached the
town and entered it. The Prophet said
: He who give up prayer
intentionally, becomes free from the convenant of Muhammad.
The Prophet said
: O Abu Hurairah, enjoin on the members of
your family to pray as you can't conceive wherefrom God will
supply you provision.
Vo!-I
PRAYER
135
EXCELLENCE OF FULFILLING THE DUTIES OF PRAYER:
The Prophet said: Compulsory prayer is like a scale. He who
measures out in full takes full. The Prophet said
: If two men of
my followers stand in prayer, it seems that their prostrations are
the same but the spirit of their prayer is like the distance of the
heaven and earth. He hinted at their God-fear. The Prophet said
God will not look to a man on the Resurection Day who does not
make his backbone erect between his bow and prostration. The
Prophet said
: If a man turns his face towards another direction in
prayer, God will turn his face in to that of an ass. The Prophet
said
:
If a man says prayer at
its appointed time, establishes
ablution, makes his bow and prostration perfect and has got God
fear, it will become bright and rise upwards and say
: May God
guard you as you have guarded me. If a man does not pray at its
appointed time, does not make ablution well and does not make
perfect his ruku and prostration and God fear,
it will become
dark and rise upwards and say
: May God destroy you as you
have destroyed me. God will keep it folded as old cloth is kept
folded. The Prophet said
: The word thief applies to one who
steals in prayer.
EXCELLENCE OF PRAYING
IN CONGERGATION
The Prophet said : The rewards of a prayer in congregation is
twenty seven times more than the prayer said alone. The Prophet
did not see once some persons joining prayer in congregation
and said
: I wished that I should give order to some one to lead
the prayer and oppose those who have not joined in prayer and
burn their houses. In another narration
: I oppose those persons
who do not pray in congregation and order that their houses
should be burnt with fuel. If a man among them had known what
rewards there are in night prayer, he would have surely been
present at night prayer. There is in Hadis
: He who remains at
night prayer. There is in Hadis
: He who remains at night prayer
prayed as it were half the night. He who remains present in the
moming prayer prayed as it were the whole night. The Prophet
said
: He who prays a prayer in congregation fills up his neck
with divine service. Hazrat Sayeed-b-Musayyeb said
: I reached
the mosque before Azan for 20 years consequitively. The sage
Waseh said
: I want three things in the world (1) such a.brother
who will keep me straight
if
I become crooked,
(2) such

136
VoI-I
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
livelihood as can be earned without begging and
(3) such a
prayer in congregation of which the faults are forgiven to me and
excellence is written for me. Hazrat Ibn Abbas said
: He who does
not respond
to Azan does not hope for good and no good
is
expected from him. The Prophet said
:
If a man prays in
congregation for forty days and does and lose even Takbir, God
writes for him two salvations—(1) one salvation from hypocrisy
and another from Hell.
EXCELLENCE OF PROSTRATION: The Prophet said
:
There is nothing except secret prostration which can take one
near God. The Prophet said
: There is no such Muslim whom God
does not give a rank in lieu of his one prostration and remove one
sin from him. A man asked the Prophet
: Pray that
I may be
included within the party of your intercession so that He may
give me mercy of your intercession in paradise. The Prophet said
: One who prostrates will gain the neamess of God, as God says
Prostrate and seek nearness. God says
: There are signs in their
foreheads as an effect of prostration. It is said that this sign is
effected as a result of dust that is attached to forehead at the time
prostration. Some say that
it
is the light of God-fear as
it
is
expressed outwardly from a secret place. This is the correct view.
Some say that it is the light that will be seen on their forehead on
the Resurrection Day on account of ablution. The Prophet said
:
When a man prostrates, the devil goes away from him weeping
and saying
: Also
! he has been ordered to prostrate and he has
prostrated. So there is Paradise for him.
I have been ordered to
prostrate but as
I have disobeyed
it, there is Hell for me.
It is
narrated
that the Caliph Abdul Aziz used not to make
prostration except on the ground. Hazrat Abu Hurairah said
:
Prostration takes a servant near God and he makes invocation at
that time.
EXCELLENCE OF GOD FEAR: God says
: Pray to remember
Me. God says
: Don't be one of the heedless. God says
: Don't
come near prayer when you are intoxicated
till you donot
understand what you say. Some say that intoxication means a
great anxiety. Some say that it means attachment to the world.
There are many worshippers who do not drink wine but they
,don't know what they say in prayer. The Prophet said
: If a man
prays two rakats without any thought of the world therein, his
past sins are forgiven. The Prophet said
: Prayer
is the
Vol-I
PRAYER
137
embodiment of modesty, humility, entreaties, repentance,
raising of hands and utterance of words "O God, O God" He who
does not do it, is a cheat. There is in earlier scriptures that God
said
: I don't accept the prayer of every one. I accept the prayer of
one who humbles himself before My glory, does not take boast in
doing My service and gives food for My sake to the hungry and
the poor.
I have made prayer compulsory, ordered for Haj and
Tawaf for My remembrance. If you have got no fear of God in
your mind, what is the value of your Zikr ? The Prophet said
:
When you pray, pray in such a manner that you are bidding
farewell. He said
: Fear God, He will teach you. God says
: Fear
God and know that you must meet Him. The Prophet said
: He
who does not restrain himself from indecency and evil deeds in
prayer keeps away God. Prayer is monazat or invocation. How
can it be with heedlessness ? Hazrat Ayesha said
: The Prophet
used to talk with us and we also used to talk with him. When the
time for prayer came, he did not as it were recognise us and we
also did not recognise him, as we remained busy in declaring the
glory of God. The Prophet said
: God does notrespond prayer of a
man who does not observe it with his mind and body. When the
Prophet Abraham stood in prayer, the voice of his mind could
have been heard from a distance of two miles. When the sage
Sayeed Tanukhi prayed, his two eyes uscd to shed tears which
flowed down, his beard. The Prophet once saw a man in prayers
sporting with his beard and said
: If he and his mind had God
fear, his organs
also would have God-fear.
It
is narrated of
Moslem-b-Yasar that whenever he wished to pray, he used to say
to his family members
: You hold conversation, I will not hear
you.
It is said that when he was praying in the congregational
mosque,one corner of the mosque once suddenly fell down for
which the people gathered there, but he could not know it till he
finished his prayer. When the time of prayer came, the heart of
I
Hazrat Ali used to tremble and his colour became changed. He
I
was questioned
: O Commander of the
faithful, what has
happened to you ? He said
: It is time of trust of God which was
I
entrusted to the heavens, earth and mountains but they became
fearful of it and refused to bear it, but I am bearing it when it has
come to me. When Hazrat Jainal Abedin, son of Hazrat Hussain,
|
performed ablution, his colour turned place. His family members
asked him. What troubles you at the time of ablution? He said
:
Don't you see before whom I am going to stand ? Hazrat Daud
used to say in his Monazat
: O my Lord, who lives in your house

138
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
PRAYER
139
Vol-I
and from whom you accept prayer ? God revealed to him
: The
man who li ves in My house and from whom I accept prayer is one
who humbles himself before My glory, passes his
life in My
remembrance, controls his passion for My sake, entertains a
stranger and shows kindness
to the aggrieved. His light will
sparkle like the rays of the sun in the sky. I respond to him if he
calls me. If he invoke Me.
I accept it. I give him patience in his
ignorance, remembrance in his carelessness and light in his
pride. His simile among the people is the smile of Ferdous in high
gardens. His river does not become dry and his face does not
become changed.
Once Hatem Asem was asked about prayer and he said
:
When the time of prayer comes, I make full ablution, come to the
praying place and wait there till my neighbours come there. Then
I stand for prayer, face the Ka'ba with Bridge under my feet,
Paradise by me right side and Hell by my left side, angel of death
behind me and think that this
is my last prayer. Then
I stand
between fear and hope, recite Takbir, make Ruk'u with humility,
prostrate with fear and sit on my Ieft waist and spead my sole of
feet and keep my right side on my toes. I don't know whether my
prayer has been accepted or not.
EXCELLENCE OF MOSQUE AND
PRAYING PLACE
God says: Those who have got faith in God and the next
world inhabit God's mosques. The Prophet said
:
If a man
constructs a mosque for God, He constructs for him a place in
Paradise. The Prophet said
: If a man loves mosque, God loves
him. He said
: When one of you enters a mosque, let him pray two
rak'ats before he sits. He said
: There is no prayer for mosque
except in mosque. He said
: Angels like one of you until he keeps
seated in his praying place. They say
: O God, send blessings on
him. O God, have mercy on him, forgive him
till he keeps his
ablution or gets out of mosque. The Prophet said
: There will be
some people among my followers who will come to mosque and
sit in groups. They will like to talk of this world and its matters.
Don't sit with them. God has got no necessity of them. He said
:
God said in some of His books
: Mosques are my houses in the
world and My neighbours are those people in them who are
habituated to go there. Good news is for one who keeps his house
pure and then meets Me in My house. He said
: When you find a
Vol-I
man visiting mosque always, bear witness that he has got faith.
He said
: Random talks in mosque consumes virtues as animals
eat grass. Hazrat Anas said
: If a man gives a light in a mosque,
angels and the bearers of the Thone seek forgiveness for him till
the light exists in the mosque. Hazrat Ali said
: When a man dies,
praying cloth in the world and his good deeds raised high in the
sky weep for him. Then he said
: The heaven and earth did not
weep for them and wait for them. Hazrat Ibn Abbas said
: The
word weeps forhim for forty days.
SECTION 2
OPEN ACTIONS IN PRAYER
After the removal of the impurities of body, place, cloth and
places of shame, make ablution facing the Ka'ba and keep some
open space between the two feet. Keep your head erect or bend a
little and close the eyes. if you cast your look, cast it to your place
of prostration. Then make niyyat, then raise both the hands up to
the ears uttering Allhaho Akbar — God is greatest. There after
recite the formula
: Glory to Thee, O God, there is Thy priase and
blessed is Thy name, exalted is Thy Majesty and there is no deity
besides Thee. I seek refuge to God from the accursed devil and I
begin in the name of God, the most Compassionate the most
Merciful. Then recite the opening chapter of the Quran and then
at least three verses of the Quran. Then saying God is greatest/
bow down and recite three times 'Glory to my Lord the Great'
and then fall in prostration on the ground and recite three times
'Glory to my Lord, the Great, Then sit down and then again fall
prostrate and recite the formula as above mentioned and then
stand erect. Thus finish one unit of prayer. Then praying another
unit in this manner, sit and recite: All invocations are for God and
all services and pure things. Peace be on thee O Prophet, and the
mercy of God and His blessing. Peace be on us and on the
righteous servants of God. I bear witness that there is no deity but
God that Muhammad is His servant and His Messenger. Then if
you do not pray four such units make the fol!owing invocation
:
O God, make Muhammad and the folIowers of Muhammad
successful as Thou didst make successful Abraham and his
followers, for surely Thou art the praised, mighty. O God, bless
Muhammad and the followers of Muhammad as Thou did bless
Abraham and the followers of Abraham. Surely Thou at the

140
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
Vol-I
praised, the mighty. They close up the service tollowed by an
innovation of your choice.
SECTION 3
INTERNAL CONDITIONS
Prayer should be observed with humility of mind. God says
'Pray to remember Me/ Presence of mind is opposed to absence
of mind or heedlessness. If one is heedless throughout his prayer,
how can he say prayer with the purpose of remembering God ?
God says
: Don't be of the heedless. He says
: Trayer is modesty
and humility/ Therein there
is injunctions, prohibitions and
blocks. The Prophet said
: If a man does not refrain from thought
of absence and evil things, it does not add to
it but distance/
There are two kinds of prayer of a heedless man. The Prophet
said
: There are many praying men who do not gain anything in
their prayer except fatigue and effort§. The prayer of a heedless
man has been spoken there. The Prophet said
: Nothing is written
for a praying man except what he understands in his prayer. Its
speciality
is that there are entreaties and seekings to God in
prayer. Monazat with inattention is not considered as Monazat.
There are God's remembrance in prayer, Quran reading, bow,
prostration, standing and
sitting. God's remembrance means
prayer and Monazat to Him. Without them, it ends in voice and
tongue.
The object of fasting is to bring under control belly and sexual
passion, or else
it ends in depriving this body from food and
drink. Body is tried by the troubles of pilgrimage. Troubles are
given to mind
if Zakat is paid out of wealth and thus mind is
tried. There is no don't that the object of these religious acts is to
remember God. If that object is not attained, there is no use in
prayer, as it is very easy to move the tongue with inattention. The
object of word is to talk and it does not occur except in mind. It
does not exist in mind without humility of spirit and presence of
mind. If you recite in prayer
: Show us the right path, and if you
are inattentive at that time,
it
is only the movement of your
tongue and nothing else. The object of Quran reading and God's
remembrance is to praise and g!orify God and to entreat Him and
invoke Him with humility of spirit, but
if his mind remains
absent at that time and does not know that He is present with
whom he
is speaking,
it must be understood that his tongue
Vol-I
PRAYER
141
moves only owing to habit but he is far away from the object of
prayer to enliven God's remembrance and with that to make firm
thetie of faith.
Sifiyan Saori said
: The prayer of one who has got no
God-fear becomes void. Hasan Basari said
: The prayer which is
not said with attention hastens towards punishment. The
Prophet said
: There are many praying men whose prayers are
written to the extent of one sixth or one tenth. In other words, the
portion of prayer which is Said with attention is only written. The
sage Abdul Wahed said
: The portion of prayer which is said with
humidity of mind is accepted. This is the consensus of opinion of
the sages. In short, eamestness of mind is the life of prayer.
LIFE OF PRAYER AND ITS
INTERNAL CONDITION
There are many works signifying the life of prayer, humility
of mind, understanding what is said, honour, hope and shame.
(1)
The meaning of humility or presence of mind is that the action
and word must be the same in mind and there should be no other
thought therein. When there is no other thing in mind which is
concentrated only to one thing, there is eamestness or presence
of mind. (2) When mind
is not present in prayer,
it does not
remain idle and is concentrated to the thoughts of the worldly
affairs with which it is immediately concerned. So there must be
firm belief that prayer is a stepping stone to the next world which
is everlasting. Presence of mind is gained only when it is realised
and the world is considered as a merely temporary abode and
insignificant.
(2)
To understand the meaning of words uttered and to
engage intellect to understand their meanings. The medicine of
removing various thoughts that come in mind in prayers is to cut
the root or to remove the reasons which cause different thoughts.
He who ioves a thing remembers that thing. For this reason, he
who loves things other than God
is not free from diverse
thoughts in prayer.
(3)
Honour of God is a condition of mind.
It rises out of
acquaintance of. two things. The first thing is the knowledge of
the glory of God. This is the root of faith, because the mind of one
who does not firmly believe in His glory,
is not given
encouragement to honour Him. The second thing
is
to think

142
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
Vol-I
^wnTtl-
hclp'e
f,
and insignlHcant. From the knowledee of these
n
°
. mUS
! have knowledge that if God would have destroyed all
mduced ltTtnt'
n° thi
?g °f H ‘S sovereignty woKte
knov^d^^tou?GoXth^morewuld^th^rarof^ml'
0re **,e
I
|
0pe
i
,
n
JGod rises out 0f firm faith in the foIIowine
“S
nTn
k
d
nr
edg
u
oiGod
’s ruercy and gif,S/ knowledge o7h”!
creation and remembrance of Paradise through prayer.
8
(6)
Shame arises out of knowledge of neelect in divin,
humhle
and
'nability to fight for God - Human mind becomes
humblem proportion of certainty of fai th.
oecomes
For this reason Haerat Ayesha said
: The Prophet talked with
he m
d
'vcalsotalked withhimbut when the time^ol prayer came
he could not recognise us and we did not recoenisp him n
•
narrated that God said to Moses
• n ll
?
h
11 ,s
Me
C “theS of r^embra^ce
a£3ja5=^*sjKBB;
f
f
mind I,ke the meanest slave and speak with Me with
the tongue of a truthful man. God revealed to him
t«ii
h
that IthaH
* f°l,0W
K
rS t0 remember Me * 1 took °ath upon MyseK
fhaf 1 sha11 remember °ne who remembers Me. When Abraham
two mt
PT
r
'T
CT WS heart Was heard fr«m a d^tance ^
•-
n mdiyidual will be forgiven in the next worlH
wXpu
8
l
t0
h
10 quahties of his "^Hd and not of his body. Nobody
will get salvahon except one who comes with a sound mind.
Y
PROFITABLE MEDICINE FOR
MAKING MIND HUMBLE
Know, O dear reader, that a believer will declare Pnri' c r>i
and fear Him hope in Him and be ashamed to H m for h^7
After his fa„h, a believer will not be free from the^e condS.'
Vol-I
PRAYER
143
Although the strength of his mind
will be according
to the
strength of his
faith, yet there
is no other cause except the
fol!owing ones for the absence of his mind, random thoughts,
heedness, absence of mind in Mozazat and absent-minded ness
in prayer. This heedlessness in prayer arises out of engagement
of mind in various thought. The medicine of keeping the mind
present is to remove all thoughts and primarily to remove the
root of these thoughts. There are two bases of this root and the
extemal root.
EXTERNAL ROOT: Thought catches what the ear hears or
the eye sees and mind tums towards that thought. This causes to
produce other thoughts. So the root of thought is eye and then the
root of one thought is another thought. He whose niyyat is fine
and aim high cannot be diverted by what occurs in his organs or
limbs, but he who is weak falls a prey to it. Its medicine is to cut
off these roots and to shut up the eyes, to pray in a dark room, not
to keep anything in front which may attract attention and not to
pray in a decorated place or a decorated and painted praying
cloth. For this reason the sages used to do divine service in dark,
narrow and unaspious rooms.
INTERNAL ROOT is very difficult. The thoughts of worldly
matters are not confined to one subject. It goes from one thought
to another. If they shut up their eyes, it does not do them any
benefit. The way to remove them
is
to take one's mind to
understand what is recited in prayer and to stick to it after giving
lip
all other thoughts. The Prophet once told Osman-b-Ali
Shaiba: I forgot to
tell you to cover the screens of variegated
colours in the room, because there should remain nothing in the
house which can divert attention from prayer.
If the rise of
thoughts is not stopped by this method, then there is another
easy method to prevent it. That is to cut off the root cause of the
disease.
It has been narrated that Abu Zaham presented a
valuable dress of variegated colours to the Holy Prophet. He put
on it and said prayer. Afterwards he took it off and said
: Take it
to Abu Zaham as it has diverted my attention from prayer. The
Prophet had a ring of gold in his hand before it was unlawful. He
threw it away when he was on the pulpit and said
: My sight has
fallen on it. It is said that Hazrat Abu Tallaha once prayed in his
own garden which pleased him so much that he forgothow many
rak'ats he prayed. He mentioned it to the Prophet and said
: O

144
I
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
Vol-I
Prophet of God, I wish to gift this garden. The Prophet said
: Give
it to whom you like. Once a man was praying in his garden in
which dates were hanging. It pleased him so much that he forgot
how many rak'ats he prayed. He mentioned it to Hazrat Osman
who said
: Spend it in the way of God. Hazrat Osman purchased it
for fifty thousand coins. Thus they used to cut off the root of their
thoughts and expiated the loss in prayers. This is the medicine for
cutting the root of the disease of mind. To bring sexual passion
under temporary control is not so benefiting. Its root must be cut as
it baffles the whole prayer. The following illustration is given. In a
certain tree numerous sparrows used to make tremendous noise as
they had their nests in it. A traveler began to drive themaway being
disgusted with their noise. They fled away for the time being but
came again to make greater noise. It he wants to get himself relieved
of the noise permanently, he should cut the tree. The sparrows will
make noise
till the tree lasts. Similarly attachment to a thing may
temporarily be removed from mind, but
it will come again and
disturb the mind. Attachment
to the world
is the root of all
thoughts, the primary cause of all losses. If one wants a peaceful
mind in prayer, he should cut off all attachments of the world. If one
is engaged in worldly matters, he should not expect to get taste in
hwocations.
MEANING OF DIFFERENT ITEMS OF PRAYER 'AZAN':
When you hear the call to prayer, think of the general call on the
Resurrection day and Iook to your external and intemal matters
when replying and make haste. Those who respond in haste to
this call, will get rep!y“with mercy on that fearful day. So keep
your mind on Azan.
MEANING OF CLEANLINESS: When you make your
praying cloth pure and clean and your body clean of impurities,
don't be indifferent to make your mind pure. Make it pure of
impure ideas and thoughts as far as possible, Repent for what
you have failed to do and determine not to do
it in future. So
make your heart pureasitis the objectof sightofyour Lord.
Meaning of covering private parts. The meaning of covering
private parts is to cover your private parts from the sight of men.
God looks to your heart. So cover the faults of your heart and
know that it is not secret from the sight of God. Your repentance,
shame and
fear will expiate
it. Stand before God just like a
Vol-I
PRAYER
145
fugitive slave who returned to his master being repentant with
humility of spirit and bentdown head.
MEANING OF FACING THE KA'BA: The meaning of
tuming your face towards the Ka'ba is to turn your mind towards
God after taking it off from all directions and all evil thoughts.
Move the external organs to move your secret mind and keep
them under control of mind. Keep the face of your mind towards
God along with the face of your body. The Prophet said
: When a
man stands
iri prayer and directs his hope, face and mind
towards God, he comes out of his prayer as on the day his mother
gave birth to him.
MEANING OF STANDING IN PRAYER: Its extemal
meaning is to stand before God with body and mind. You shall
bend down your head which is higher than your other limbs. The
meaning of this bending down of your head is to bend down your,
mind free from all self-conceit and pride. Know that you are
standing before the mighty and greatest Emperor. You fear king
but you don't fear God although He is fit to be feared most. For
this reason Hazrat Abu Bakr asked the Prophet
: How should we
be shameful to God ? He said
: You should be shameful to God
just as you become shamefui to see the most God-fearing man
amongyou.
MEANING OF NIYYAT: Promise firmly that you
will
respond to God's orders through prayer, make
it perfect and
make niyyat sincerely for Him and keep an eye with whom you
are speaking secretly, how you talk and for what matter. At this
time your head should perspire, your limbs should tremble and
the colour of your face should become changed.
MEANING OF TAKBIR: When your tongue utter Takbir, let
not your mind speak falsehood. Your mind should correspond
with your tongue in declaring Him to be the greatest. If you have
got in mind something which is greater than God, God will attcst
thatyou arealiar.
MEANING OF OPENING DOS:
'I tum my face towards the
Creator of heavens and earth/ To turn face towards the Ka'ba
means to turn it towards God. God exists every where and so to
tum towards the Ka'ba means to turn towards the only object of
your Iife, towards the Almighty after giving up all things. When
you recite T am not of the polytheists/ your mind harbours then

146
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
Vol-I
secret shirk as God says
: If any body wishes to meet with his
Lord, let him do good deeds and do not set up any partner in His
divine service/ This was revealed with respect to a person who
wants divine service and also the praise of men. So take care of
this shirk. When you utter—'My life and my death are for God',
know then that this condition is of the slave who safeguard the
existence of his master in lieu of his existence. When you utter—
'I
seek refuge to God/ you should give up your low desires and
temptations. You should then take firm resolution to take refuge
to the fort of God giving up the fort of the devil. The Prophet said
: God said There no deity but God' is My fort. He who enters My
fort is safe from My punishment. God protects one who has got
no deity but God. He who takes his low desires as his deity lives
in the fort of the devil and not in the fort of God.
MEANING OF QURAN READING: Regarding this matter,
men are of three classes—(1) he who moves his tongue but his
mind
is heedless, (2) he who moves his tongue and his mind
folloWs his tongue, this is the rank of the fortunate, (3) he whose
tongue is directed first towards understanding the meaning and
then his minds take his tongue as its servant. Tongue will give
expression of mind.
MEANING OF OTHER ITEMS: When you utter—T begin in
the name of the Most Compassionate, the Most MerrifuP, seek
first the favour of God. When you say Thou are the Lord of
Judgment day/ understand then that there is no sovereignty
except His sovereignty and fear His judgment. Express your
helplessness by saying "Thee do we worship' and understand
that religious acts do not become easy except with His assistance.
It is said that when Zarrah-b-Auf finished reciting 'when the
trumpet will be blown, he fell down senseless and died. When
Ibrahim Nahhyi heard this verse, 'when the sky will be rent
asunder' hebegan to tremble seriously. So read theQuran slowly
and attentively so
that
it becomes easy to understand. The
Prophet said
: God remains with the praying man till he does not
look to and fro. As it is your duty to protect your head and eyes,
so it is compulsory on you to restrain your mind in prayer from
thoughts other than God. When you look towards any other
thing, remember then that God sees your condition. If you are
absent minded at the time of monazat, it is very bad. Keep the
fear of God within your mind. Hazrat Abu Bakr used to stand in
Vol-I
PRAYER
147
prayer just like a statue. Some used to remain in Ruku like a
motionless stone, so mush so that birds sat on his head. The
Prophet said
: Pray as if it is your farewell prayer, having in mind
fear and shame owing to defects in prayers and fear that your
prayer may not be accepted and that it may be thrown on your
face with your express and secret sins. There is in Hadis that
when a man stands in prayer, God lifts up the screen between
Him and His servant and faces him. The angels climb upon his
two shouldes and pray in horizon along iyith him and says
Ameen along with his invocation. They spread virtues over the
scalp of his head from above the horizon. A proclaimer
proclaims: If this invoker had known to whom he is invoking he
would not have looked
to and
fro. The doors of heaven are
opened up for a praying man and God takes pride before His
angels for the praying man. So the doors of heaven are opened up
for him and the face of God comes before his face. In other words,
his Kashf is opened. There is written in the Torah
: O son of Adam
don
t be baffled to stand up before Me in prayer in weeping state,
because then I come near your mind and you also see My Iight
unseen. He said: The softness, weeping and victory which a
praying man feels in his mind, bespeak of the advent of God in
his mind. When His neamess is not the neamss of space, there is
no meaning of it except the nearness of mercy, guidance and
removalofevils.
God says
: Those believers got salvation who fear God in
their prayers. Then He praised them with
their speciality of
prayer.
It
is connected with God fear. Then he described the
qualities of those who got salvation through prayer, as God says
Those who guard their prayers, Then He says
: They will inherit
the garden of Ferdous. They will abide therein.
If tongue
is
moved with inattention, can
this reward be achieved
? The
praying one will inherit the gardens, they will directly see divine
light and they will enjoy the happiness of neamess.
STORIES OF THE PRAYERS OF
GOD-FEARING MEN
Know, O dear readers, that God-fear is the result of real faith
and belief. He who has keen given
it, fe*rs God in and out of
prayer, when he remains alone and even at the time of calls of
nature, because he who fears God knows it well that He knows
the condition of mind and his sins and faults. Fear grows in the

148
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
PRAYER
149
Vol-I
mind of one who knows this and it is not limited only in prayer. It
is narrated that a sage did not raise up his head for forty years
being ashamed and fearful of God. The saint Rabi-b-Khasem
used to close up his eyes so tightly that the people would think
that he was blind. He used to go to tfye house of Ibn Masud for
twenty years. Whenever his female Slave saw him, she used to
f
say to her master. Your blind friend has come. At this Hazrat Ibn
Masud used to laugh. Whenever he used to knock at the door, the
female slave would come to him and see him with closed eyes.
Hazrat Ibn Masud told him
: Give good news to those who are
humble By God. Had the Prophet seen you he would have surely
been pleased with you. One day he went with Ibn Masud to the
shop of a blacksmith. When he saw him blowing and fire coming
out, he at once fell down senseless. Ibn Masud sat near his head
up to the prayer time but still he did not regain his senses. Then
he bore him to his house and he did not recover sense
till his
prayer for five times passed away . Ibn Masud sat by his head and
said
: By God this is real God-fear.
The saint Rubi said
: I did not observe such prayer in which I
had other thing in mind except what I uttered and what was said
to me. Hazrat Amer-b-Abdullah feared God in prayer verymuch.
When he prayed, his daughter beat drum and the women of the
house hold conversation but he did not hear them. One day he
was told
: Does your mind think any matter in prayer ? He said,
Yes, it thinks about its stay before God and going from this world
into another world, He was told
: Do you see what we generally
see about the affairs of the world ? He said
: I consider it better
that my teeth should go from one side to another than whatyou
see. This is not attention in prayer.
Moslem-b-Yasar was one of them, it is said that while he
was one day praying within a mosque, one of its corners fell
down but he did not come to know of it. The limb of a certain
pious man was damaged and it required operation but it was
not at all possible. Some said
: When he prays, he will not be
able to feel
its pangs, Accordingly the limb was operated
while he was engaged in prayer. Some said
: Prayer belongs
to the next world. When you enter prayer, go out of the
world. Hazrat Abu Darda said
: It is the rule of religion that
when a ,man goes
to prayer, he should perform
all
his
necessary things, so that his mind becomes free from
Vol-I
thoughts. The Prophet said
: The prayer of a man is not written
except i ts one third, half, one-fourth, one fifth, one sixth or one
tenth.Hesaid:Whatissaidinprayerwithunderstandingisonly
written for him, Hazrat Omar once said from his pulpit
: The
headof twosidesofamanbecomesgrey,yethedoesnotobserve
prayer for pleasure of God. He was asked
: How does it occur ?
Hesaid :HisGod-fear,modestyandhisself-surrenderforGod
do notbecomeperfect. Abid Ahiya wasonceasked
: Whatis the
meaning of heedlessness in prayer ? He said
: One commits
mistakes in his prayerand does not know how many rak'ats he
has prayed. The sage Hasan Basari said in its explanation
: He
forgets the time of prayer. Jesus Christ said
: God says
: My
servantgetssalvationbyobservingcompulsory duties,buthe
gains My nearness by doing optional duties. The Prophet said
God says
: My servant will notget salvation till he fulfills the
compulsorjduties.
SECTION 4
IMAMATE
There are six duties of Imam bcfore prayer. (1) He shall not be
an Imam of people unless they give consent to it. If they differ, an
Imam would be elected by a majority.
If the minority are
religious and good, their opinion should be followed. There is in
Hadis
: The prayer of three persons will not go up beyond their
heads
(1) a fugitive slave,
(2) a woman whose husband
is
displeased with her, and (3) an Imam with whom his people are
dis-satisfied. The Imam is a guarantee for his followers, (2) When
a man is given option between Azan and Imamate, he should
prefer Imamate as the office of an Imam ii better than that of a
Muazzem. Some say that Azan is better as there are many merits
of Azan. The Prophet said
: An Imam is a surety for his foJlowers
and Muazzen is an object of trust. He said
: The Imam is an object
of trust. When he bends down, the fo!lowers bend down and
when he prostrates, they prostrate. He said
: When he fulfills the
prayer, it is for him and for them also. If there is defect in
it, it
goes against him and against them also. For this reason, the
Prophet said
: O God, show the straight path to the Imams and
forgive the Muazzens.
The Prophet said: Paradise becomes sure for one without
account who is Imam for seven years. He who proclaims Azan for

150
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
PRAYER
151
Vol-I
forty years ‘will enter into Paradise without account. The
Prophet, Hazrats Abu Bakr and Omar used to fix salary for an
Imam. The Prophet said. One day of a just ruler is better than
divine service for seventy years. The Prophet said
: Your Imams
are your intercessors. He said
: Your Imam are representatives of
God on your behalf. If you wish to purify your prayer, place in
front the best man among you. Some earlier sages said
: There is
no better man after the Prophet than the leamed except the
praying Imams, as they stand between God and His servants,
some with Prophethood, some with learning and some with
prayer,
the pillar of religion. By
this proof, the companions
elected Abu Bakr as
their Imam. They then Said
: We have
considered that prayer is a pillar of religion on whom the Prophet
was pleased for this pillar. They did not select Bilal as theProphet
selected him for Azan. It is reported that a man asked the Prophet:
Give me clue to such an action which will lead me to Paradise. He
said
: Be Muazzen. He said
: I can't do it. he said : Then be Imam. He
said
: I can'tdo it He said
: Then pray behind an Imam.
(3) The Imam shall observe the times of prayers and shall
pray for pleasure of God in their earliest times. The Prophet
said
: The Imam who prays at the Iast time of a prayer, does not
miss it, but what he misses in its earliest time is better than the
world and
its
treasures.
It
is not good
to delay prayer in
expectation of a greater number of men. One day, there was
some delay for the morning prayer on the part of the Prophet
when he was in a journey. The companions did not wait for the
Prophet when he made delay in making ablution. The Prophet
then said
: You havedonebetter. Do italways.
(4) Act as an Imam for the sake of God and fulfill with good
manners the trust of God in the other conditions of prayer and
act as an Imam with sincere intention and don't take for
it
remuneration. The Prophet said Osman-b-Affan
: Appoint
such a Muazzen who wiil not take remuneration for his Azan.
Azan guides to the path of prayer and it is better not to receive
its remuneration. Hazrat Sufiyan said
: Pray behind a religious
or irreligious man exceptbehind habitual drunkard, or cursed
man, or one disobedient
to parents, or an invocator or a
fugitive slave.
(5) Don't utter Takbir till row is arranged straight and look to
right and
left. The Prophet said
: A Muazzen should wait
VoI-I
between Azan and Aqamat for so long as an eater eats or a man
passes calls of nature. So he prohibited to retain urine and stool.
He ordered
to
finish dinners
for peace of mind before Isha
prayer.
(6)
An Iman shall
raise his voice in the time of Takbir
Tahrima and other Takbirs as well but a follower will utter it in a
low voice. The Imam has got three duties at the time of Quran
reading in prayer.
(1) He should recite the opening Doa and
Aauzobillah in silent voiceand recite loudly the Fateha and Suras
in congregational prayer of Fajr, Isha and Magrib. One should do
it even at the time when he prays alone. When he recites Ameen
with voice, the followers will recite it loudly.
SECTION 5
MERITS OF JUMMA PRAYER
Know, O dear readers, that Jumma day is a holy day. God
honoured Islam therewith and gave glory to the Muslims. God
says
: When there
is Azan for prayer on the Jumma day, run
towards remembrance of God and give up buy and sale. The
Prophet said
: God has made compulsory on you on this day of
mine and in this place of mine. The Prophet said
: If a man loses
three Jumas without any excuse, God puts a seal in his mind. In
another narration
: He throws Islam on his back. The Prophet
said
: Gebriel came to me with a clean mirror in his hand and said
: This is Jumma. God has made it obligatory on you, so that it may
be a festival for you and after you for you followers. I said
: What
good there is for us in it ? He said
: You have got an suspicious
time in it. If a man seeks anything to God at this time, God has
promised that He will give it to him. If he is deprived of that,
many additional things aregiven to him in that connection. If any
man wants to save himself from any evil on that day, God saves
him from a greater calamity or a like calamity which has been
decreed on him. Jumma day is the best day to us andwe shall call
it on the Resurrection day as the day of grace. I asked him
: What
object is there in calling it as the day of grace ? He said
: Your God
has made a valley in paradise made of white musk. When the
Jumma day comes, God descends on His Throne in Illyyin and
sheds His lusture and they look on towards His august face. The
Prophet said
: The sun rose for the first time on the best Jumma
day and Hazrat Adam was created on that day. He entered

152
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
PRAYER
153
Vol-I
Paradise first on that day and he was thrown in to this world on
that day and his pensance was accepted on that day. He died on
this day and Resurrection will take place on this day. This day is a
day of blessing to God. The heavens and angels have been given
names on this day. There is a Hadis that God will release six lacs
of men from Hell on this day. The Prophet said
: When theJumma
day is safe, all the days remain safe. He said
: If a man dies on the
Jumma day or night, the rewards of one martyrdom are written
for him and the punishment of grave is forgiven.
CONDITIONS OF JUMMA PRAYER
Ten rules should be observed on the Jumma day. (1)
It is
better to prepare for the Jumma day from Thursday. After Asr of
Thursday, turn attention to invocation, seeking forgiveness and
Tasbih as the merits of this time are equal to those of the
auspicious unknown time of Friday, (2) Make your clothes clean
on this day, use scent and keep your mind free from anxieties so
that you may rise up with a free mind on Friday morning. Try to
fast on this day as there is a great merit in it. Pass Thursday night
by reading the Quran and praying. The Prophet said
: God shows
mercy on the man who rises in the moming and awakes others,
takes bath and causes the baths of others (3) Take bath in the
morning of Friday. The Prophet said
: It is obligatory on every
mature man to take bath on Friday. He said
: Let one who attends
Jumma take bath. he said
: Let one male or female who attends
Jumma prayer take bath.
(4) If is commendable to take recourse to beauty on this day
to take fine dress, to be pure and to use scent. Regarding purity,
cleanse your teeth, cut your hairs; slip your mustache and do
everything necessary for purity. Hazrat Ibn Masud said: If a man
manicures nails on the Jumma day, God takes out disease
therefrom and gives him cure therein. Regarding dress, wear
white dress as it is dear to God. To use turban is commendable.
The Prophet said: God and His angels bless those who wear
turban on theJumma day.
(5) It is commendable to go to the congregational mosque in
the moming. The Prophet said: He who goes to Jumma in the
early part gets rewards of the sacrifice of a camel and he who goes
at the second time gets the rewards of the sacrihce of a cow and
he who goes at the third time gets the reward of the sacrifice of a
Vol-I
goat and he who goes at the fourth time gets the reward of the
sacrifice of a cock. He who goes at the fifth stage gets the reward
of the charity of an egg. When the Imam gets up for khutba,
record
is folded up and pen
is
lifted up. The angels gather
together wear the pulpit and hear the Zikr of God. The Prophet
said: There are three things. If the people had known whatgood
there
is therein, they would have come
to search
it like a
camel-Azan, first row and going to the dmgregational mosque at
dawn. In the first century, the pathway became full of men from
early hours up to dawn. The prophet used to come out with light
and the mosque became filled up with men like the day of I'd. It
became obsolete afterwards.
It
is said
that the innovation of
giving up the practice of going
to the mosque at dawn
first
entered into Islam. It is a matter of regret that the Jews and the
Christians go
to
their synayogues and churches at dawn on
Saturday and Sunday respectively and the worldly people go to
markets for buy and sale at dawn but those who seek the next
world cannotgo to mosqueatdawn.
(6) Ranks of entering a mosque: Nobody should go to the
front row of the mosque crossing the necks of men. The Prophet
said: On the resurrect on day such a person will be made a bridge
and the people would tread over him. Once when the Prophet
was reciting khutba, he noticed
that a man was advancing
towards the front row after crossing over the necks of man. After
finishing prayer, the Prophet called him and
said: O such a
person, what prevented you to pray Jumma with me today. He
said: O Prophet of God,
I prayed with you. The Prophet said:
Have I not found you to cross over the necks of men? He hinted
by this that his action has become void. In another narration, the
Prophet said to him: What prevented you to pray with me? He
said: O Prophet of God, have you not seen me? The Prophet said:
I have seen you coming late and giving trouble to the people
present. In other words you have delayed to come at dawn and
have given trouble to those present.
(7) Don't go to the mosque by the front of a praying man,
keep wall or pillar or stick in front when praying so that the
people may not pass by your front. The Prophet said: His waiting
for 40 years
is better than his going by the front of men. The
Prophet said: It is better for any man to be powdered to earth to

154
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
Vol-I
be blown off by air like refuges than to cross the front of a praying
man.
(8) Try to take seat in the first row. 'There is in Hadis: If a man
takes bath and tells another to take bath, if a man rises early and
makes another awake early and goes near the Imatn and hears,
the sins which he has committed between two Jumma and
additional three days become expiration for him.
(9) Prayer should be stopped at the time when the Imam gets
upon the pulpit. The prophet said: If a man says to another at the
time when the Imam delivers address 'Be silent', he holds useless
talk. The Jumma of one who holds useless talk is not performed.
(10) Follow the Imam in Jumma. When the Jumma is finished,
recite before talk the chapters 'Alham do Lillah' seven times,
'Ikhlas' seven times., 'Falaq' seven times and Nas seyen times. A
certain sage said: He who does this remains safe up to the next
Jumma from the devil.
GOOD DEEDS ON JUMMA DAY
(1) Be present at the assembly of leaming at dawn or after
prayer. There is ahadis that to remain present in an assembly of
learning is better than optional prayer of one thousand rak'ats.
(2) To medidate well for the auspicious moment. There is in
an well known Hadis: There is a time on Jumma day in which a
Muslim is granted what he seeks. There is in another Hadis: He
who prays does not lose it. There is difference of opinion about
this auspicious moment. Some say it is at the time of sun-rise.
Some say it is after noon, some say, it is at the time of Azan. Some
say
it is when the Imam gets upon his pulpit and begins his
address. Some say it is at the last time of Asr prayer. Some say it
spreads for the day like the Blessed night. So one who seeks it
should remain in meditation throughout the day. Some say it is
intermingled with every time of Jumma day. This is the correct
view. This is supported by the following Hadis: There is a day
among your days when your Lord gives out breath. Be prepared
for that day. This is Jumma day among the days.
(3) It is commendable to recite Darud this day on the Prophet.
The Prophet said: If a man sends Darud to me eighty times on
Jumma day, God forgives his minor faults for eighty years, He
was asked: O Prophet of God, what is Darud upon you? He said:
Vol-I
PRAYER
155
Say: O God, bless Muhammad, Thy servant, Thy Prophet and
Thy Apostle, the illiterate Prophet.
(4) Recite the Quran more in this day specially chapter Qahaf.
The Prophet said:
If a man recites the chapter Qahaf on the
Jumma day or night, he is given such light which is visible from
Mecca and his sins are forgiven up to the next Jumma and the
merits of three days in addition are given to him and seventy
thousand angels bless him till dawn. He is saved from diseases,
pains of stomach, pleurisy, tuberculosis and the trials of Dajjal.
(5) It is commendable to recite Darud at the time of entering
mosque and not to sit till one prays four rakats reciting therein
Ikhlas fifty times in each rakat. The Prophet said: He who prays
such, will not die till he is shown his place in paradise.
(6) It is commendable to give charities on Juman day. The
merits are increased manifold.
(7) Keep yourself engaged in divine service for the whole
Jumma day after giving up worldly duties.
SECTION 6
PRAYERS OTHER THAN OBLIGATORY PRAYERS
There are three kinds of other prayers - Sunnat, Mustahab
(commendable) and Nafl (optional). Sunnat prayer
is such
prayer which the Prophet observed for all times, such as the
prayers after obligatory prayers. Mustahab prayer is such prayer
of which the excellence has been described by Hadis and which
the Prophet did not observe always. Nafl prayer is such prayer
which does not fall within the first two categories. What a man
prays willingly for pleasure of God other than the above prayers
is optional.
SUNNAT PRAYER: There are eight Sunnat prayers among
which five are said along with five times of prayer and three in
addition - forenoon prayer, Tahajjud prayer and prayer between
Magriband Isha.
(1) Two rakat sunnat before Fajr prayer. The Prophet said:
Two rak'ats of Sunnat prayer before Fajr is better than the world
and what is in it.

156
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
Vol-I
(2) Six rak'ats of Sunnat prayers of Zuhr-four rak'ats before it
and two after
it. The Prophet said: He who prays four rak'ats
after declining of the sun and makes Ruku and prostration well
and recites the Quran well, seventy thousand angels pray.for him
and seek forgiveness for him up to night. The Prophet said: If a
man prays 12 rak'ats daily besides the obligatory prayers, a
building will be built for him in Paradise - two rak'ats before
Fajar, 4 rakats before Zuhr and two rak'ats before Asr and two
rakats after Magrib.
(3) Four rak'ats before Asr. The Prophet said: O God, have
mercy on the man who prays four rak'ats before Asr.
(4) Two rak'ats after magrib.
(5) Four rak'ats after Isha. Hazrat Ayesha reported that the
Prophet used to go to bed after praying 4 rak'ats after Isha.
Many learned men said after collecting
all traditions that
there are seventeen rak'ats of Sunnat prayers - two rak'ats before
Fajry four rak'ats before Zuhr and two rak'ats after it, four rak'ats
before Asr, two rak'ats after Magrib and three rak'ats after Isha.
(6) Bitr prayer: Hazrat Anas said: The Prophet used to pray
fhree rak'ats of Bitr after Isha reciting therein 'Sabbehesme
Rubbihil Ala' in the first rak'at, Kaferun in the second raka't and
Ikhlas in the third rakat.
(7) Forenoon prayer: It is up to eight rak'ats. Hazrat Ayesha
said that the Prophet used to pray four rak'ats in the forenoon
and sometimes increased it.
(8) Prayer between Magrib and Isha. The Prophet said:
There are six rakat prayers between Magrib and Isha of which the
merits are great. The Prophet said that this prayer is included
with the prayer of Awabin.
OPTIONAL PRAYERS IN WEEKLY DAYS
SUNDAY: The Prophet said: If a man prays four rak'ats on
Sunday and recitesa in ach rak'ats the opening chapter and
Amaner Rasul, innumerable merits are written for him like the
number of Christian males and females. The Prophet said:
Proclaim the unity of God by many prayers on Sunday as God is
one and there is no partner for him.
Vol-I
PRAYER
157
MONDAY: The Prophet said: If a man prays two rak'ats in
the early part of Monday reciting Fateha once in each rak'aL
Ayatul Kursi once, Ikhlas once, Nas once, Falaq once and then
after salam Istigfar twelve times and Darud twelve times, God
forgives all his sins. The Prophet said: If a man prays 12 rak'ats on
Monday and recites in each rak'at Sura Fateha and Ayatul Kursi
and when he finishes prayer recites Ikhlas 12 times and Istigfar
12 times, he will be said on the Resurrection day: O son of so and
so, rise up and take rewards from God. The first reward that
willbe rewarded to him is one thousand dresses, one throne on
his head and he will be said: Enter Paradise. One lac angels will
greet him and each angel will have one present and they will
accompany him and they will carry him to one thousand palaces
oflight.
TUESDAY: The Prophet said: If a man prays ten rak'ats in
the early part of Tuesday with Fateha and Ayatul Qursi and
Ikhlas three times in each rak'aL his faults will not be written for
seventy days. If he dies on the last day, he dies a martyr and his
sins for seventy years will be forgiven.
WEDNESDAY: The Prophet said: If a man prays 12 rak'ats
after rising on Wednesday and recites in each rak'at Fateha and
Ayatul Qursi once and Ikhlas three times, Nas and Falaq each
three times/a proclaimer will proclaim near the Throne, O
servant of God, your actions have been accepted and your future
sins forgiven. Punishment of the Resurrection day will be lifted
up from you and you will be given the actions of a Prophet on
thatday.
THURSDAY: The Prophet said: If a man recites between Juhr
and Asr two rak'ats with fateha and Ayatul Qursi in the first
rak'at one hundred times, Fateha and Ikhlas in the second rak'at
one hundred times and Darud one hundred times, God
will
reward him with
fasting of Rajab, Shaban and Ramzan,the
rewards of one Haj and innumertable virtues will be written for
him.
PRIDAY: The Prophet said: There is a prayer on the Jumma
day. When the sun rises up to one bow's distance or more and if a
believing man makes full ablution and prays two rak'ats with
faithand hoping for reward, God writes for him two hundred
virtues and effaces from him two hundred sins. If a man prays

158
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
Vol-I
four rak'ats, God will open for him in Paradise 800 doors and
forgive all his sins. If a man prays 12 rakats, 1200 merits will be
written for him and 1200 sins will be effaced from him and there
will be for him 1200 doors in Paradise. The Prophet said: If a man
on Jumma day enters the mosque and prays four rak'ats after
Jumma prayer with Fateha 50 times and Ikhlas 50 times in each
rak'at, he will not die
till he sees his place in paradise or it is
shown to him.
SATURDAY: The Prophet said: If a man prays four rak'ats
on Saturday with Fateha once and Ikhlas three times and then
Ayatul Qursi in each rakat, God will write for him for every word
one Haj and one Umrah and one year's fasting and prayer for
each word and he will reside with the Prophets and martyrs
under the Throne of God.
OPTIONAL PRAYERS IN WEEKLY NIGHTS
SUNDAY NIGHT: The Prophet
said:
If a man prays 20
rak'ats in the night of Sunday with Fatiha and Ikhlas 50 times,
Nas and Falaq once in each rak'at and recites
Istigfar one
hundred times and recites Istigfar for himself and his parents and
Darud one hundred times and takes refer to God by realizing
himself from his own strength and then says: I bear witness that
there is no deity but God and
I bear witness that Adam is the
chosen one of God and His natural creation, that Abraham is His
friend, Moses
is Kalimulla, Jesus
is the Spirit of God and
Muhammad
is the friend of God, he
will get merits as
innumerable as the persons who made calumny against God
before and who did not make calumny and on the Resurrection
day he will be raised along with the believers and it will be the
duty of God to admit him in Paradise along with the Prophets.
MONDAY NIGHT: The Prophet said: If a man prays 4 rakat
in the night of Monday with Fatiha and Ikhlas ten times in the
first rakat, Fatiha and Ikhlas twenty times in the second rak'at,
Fatiha and Ikhlas thirty times in the third rak'at and Fatiha and
Ikhlas forty times in the fourth rak'at and then returns salam and
afterwards recites Ikhlas 75 times and seeks Istigfar for himself
and his parents 75 times and then prays for his needs to God, He
accepts his invocation.
TUESDAY NIGHT: The Prophet said: He who prays two
rak'ats therein with chapters Fatiha and Ikhlas 15 times, Nas 15
VoI-I
PRAYER
159
times, Falaq 15 times, Ayatul Qursi 11 times, Istigfar 15 times,
will get ample rewards. The Prophet said: He who prays in
Tuesday night two rak'ats with Fateha in each rak'at followed by
chapter Ikhlas seven times, God will release him from Hell and it
will be for him on the Resurrection day guide and proof.
WEDNESDAY NIGHT: The Prophet said: He who prays two
rak'ats in Wednesday night with Fatiha and Falaq ten times in the
first rak'at and Fatiha and Nas ten times in the second rak'at and
then after finishing it reads Istigfar ten times and then Darud ten
times, seventy thous-and angels come down for him from every
heaven and write for him rewards upto the Resurrection Day.
THURSDAY NIGHT. The Prophet said
: He who prays two
rak'ats between Magrib and Isha with Fatiha and Ayatul Qursi
five times, Falaq five times, Nas five times and after prayer
Istigfar 15 times and bestows them for his parents, obeys his
duties towards his parents although he was disobedient to them
before. God gives him what He gives to the siddiqs and martyrs.
FRIDAY NIGHT: The Prophet said: He who prays 12 rak'ats
between Magrib and Isha with Fatiha and Ikhlas 11 times, prays
as it were for 12 years for the nights and fasted for the days.The
prophet said: Send many Daruds in Jumma day and night.
SATURDAY NIGHT: The Prophet said: He who prays 12
rak'ats between Magrib and Isha, a mansion is built for him in
Paradise, he gets rewards of charity to each male and female, gets
release from the Jews and it becomes the duty of God to forgive
him.
OPTIONAL ANNUAL PRAYERS
Such, prayers are four - (1) Prayers of two I'ds or festivals, (2)
Tarawih prayers, (3) Prayer in Rajab, and (4) Prayer in Shaban.
(2) PRAYER OF TWO I'DS: They are Sunnat Muaqqadah
and there are several duties in them. Take bath in the morning of
I'd day, take dresses and use scents. Go by one way and retum by
another. The Prophet used to observe
it. He used to order the
servants, slaves and women to come out for prayers on these
days. It is better to pray I'd prayers in open fields except Mecca
and Baitul Muqaddas. The time runs from sun-rise to sun decline
at noon. The time for animal sacrifice on Idul Azha runs from

160
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
Vol-I
after the prayer to the end of the 13th day of Zilhaj. I'd charity is
tobegivenbeforeprayer.
i
i
The form of prayer runs as follows. The Imam will pray two
rak'ats with six Takbirs in addition, three in the first rak'at and
three in the second. The Imam will then deliver sermon and then
1
makeMonazat,
;
i
(2) TARAWITH PRAYER:
It consists of twenty rak'ats.
It
i
maybe said also in congregation. The Holy Prophet sometimes
I
prayed it alone and sometimes in congregation. He said;
I fear
this prayer may be imposed on you as a compulsory duty. It was
Hazrat Omar who directed the Muslims to observe
it in
congregation. The Prophet said: As
it is more meritorious
to
observe compulsory prayer in mosque than in houses, so
it is
more meritorious to observe optional prayers in houses than in
mosques. The Prophet said: The merits of one rak'at prayer in
this mosque of mine
is one thousand times greater than
observing
it in other mosques and the merits of one rak'at of
prayer in the mosque of the Ka'ba is better than one thousand
times than observing it in my mosque. The prayer of one who
prays in a corner of his house and knows nobody than God is
better than
all these prayers."
It
is better however
to pray
Tarawih in congregation as HazratOmar did it.
(3) PRAYER IN RAJAB: The Prophet said: One who fasts five
|
days in Rajab, prays twelve rak'ats between Magrib and Isha
with a unit of two rak'ats (which certain formalities as
prescribed), his invocation is accepted.
i
(4) PRAYER IN SHABAN: It is observed in the night of the
f
15th Shaban. There are one hundred rak'ats of prayer with a unit
[
of two rak'ats. The earlier sages used to observe this prayer.
POURTH KIND OF OPTIONAL PRAYERS
|
These prayers are connected with causes and they are nine in
number (1) Prayer of solar and (2) lunar eclipses, (3) prayer for
rain, (4) funeral prayer (5) prayer for entering into mosque, (6)
prayer of ablution, (7) two rakats between Azan and Aqamat,. (8)
two rak'ats at the time of coming out of house for joumey and
two rak'ats at the time of entry into house after joumey and (9)
prayer for seeking good called Istakhara prayer.
Vol-I
PRAYER
161
PRAYER FOR SOLAR AND LUNAR ECLIPSE: The Prophet
smd: Solar and lunar eclipses are two signs out of the signs of
God. They do not occur for birth or death of anybody. When you
see it, turn towards the remembrance of God and prayer. He said
lt when his son Ibrahim died and people ascribed it to the abov6
cause.
PRAYER FOR RAIN: The Prophet used
to observe
this
prayer commg out in the open field when there was drought and
want of rain for a continued long time. This should be preceded
y fast for three days and then on the fourth day prayer be said in
the open field m congregation for rain with the greatest humility
of spint and eamestness of mind and then invocation should be
made in the following manner: O God, Thou hast commanded us
to invoke Thee and Thou hast promised us to accept it. We have
mdeed mvoked Thee as Thou hast commanded us. So accept our
mvocataon as Thou hast promised us. O God, shower blessing on
us with Thy forgiveness and accept our invocation by sendine us
ramandgivmgusampleprovision.
FUNERAL PRAYER: This prayer is Farze Kefaya or bindine
on commumty as a whole.
It is optional only for one who
is
exempted owing
to the presence of some members of the
commumtyin the prayer. The Prophetsaid: It forty Muslims who
do not set up partnership wi th God attend the funeral prayer of a
Muslim, God accepts their intercession for him. Follow the bier
after prayer up to the grave and recite the lollowine after
entermg m the grave-yard. Peace be on you, O the inmates of
these house of the behevers and Muslims. May God show mercv
on those who have gone before and who have come latter. We
shall reach you if God wills. Then standing by the side of the
grave of the person just buried, redte the folIowing: O God Thv
servant has retumed to Thee. Be kind
to him and show'him
mercy. O God, removethe earth from his two sides and open the
doors of heaven for his soul and accept it with good acceptance.
O God, if he is a virtuous man, increase his virtues manifold and
u he is a sinner, forgive him.
PRAYER AFTER ENTRY INTO MOSQUE: It is two rakats
or more and prayer after ablution is also two rak'ats. The Prophet
said: I saw Bilal in Paradise and asked him: For what action ha ve
rrr
T
Paradir
before me? He said: 1
«ot^^S
the fact that I prayed two rak'ats after every ablution.

162
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
Vol I
At the time of coming out of the house and entering it after
journey, pray two rak'ats. The Prophet said: Pray two rak ats
when you go out of your house so that you may be saved from the
harms of going out. The Prophet said: When any special work is
not begun with the name of God r it goes withoutblessing;
ISTAKHARAH PRAYER: This prayer
is said before an
action is undertaken to know whether it will be good or bad. It is
of two rak'ats with Chapter Kaferun in the
first rak'at ;and
chapter Ikhlas in the second and at the end with the following
invocation: O God, I wish to know its good or bad with the help
of Thy knowledge and I pray for strength from Thee and I pray
for Thy abundaht mercy, as Thou knowest and I don't know and
Thou knowest the unseen. O God, if Thou knowest that this affair
will be for my worldly or next worldly good and for the result of
my affairs sooner or latter, give strength to me, give me blessing
therein and then make it easy for me. If Thou knowest that this
affair of mine will be bad for me for my world, next world and the
result of my affairs sooner or latter, tum me from it and it from
me. Thou art poweriul over all things. The Prophet said: If any
man among you proposes to do a thing, let him pray two rak ats,
name the project and invoke with the above invocation.
(8) PRAYER FOR NECESSITY:
If
a matter becomes
necessary for his religion or for his world, let him pray twelve
rak'ats for fulfillment of his necessity with Ayatul Qursi and
Ikhlas in each rak'at and at the end of the prayer of two rak'ats, let
him invoke as prescribed.
(9) PRAYER FOR TASBIH: It is also called Doa, Masurah.
The Prophet said to Hazrat Abbas: Shall I not make gift to you?
Shall I not show kindness on you? Shall I not love you with such a
thing which, if you do, will be a cause for God to forgive your
past and future sins, old and new sins, open and secret evils?
Pray four rak'ats (as prescribed).
*
CHAPTER V
|
ZAKAT
God placed Zakat next to prayer and it is the second pillar of
Islam out of five pillars. God says: Keep up prayer and pay Zakat.
The Prophet said: Islam is founded on five pillars - (1) There is no
deity but God and Muhammad is His servant and messenger,
and to bear witness to this formu!a, (2) to keep up prayers, (3) to
pay Zakat, (4) to fast and (5) to make pilgrimage. The punishment
of those who do not pay Zakat has been mentioned in this verse:
'Give good news of grievous punishment to those who hoard up
gold and silver and do not spend in the way of God.' To spend
means here to pay the compulsory duty of Zakat. Ahnaf-b>Qais
said: We were with a party of the Quraish. Hazrat Abu Zarr,
|
while passing by that way said: Give good news to those who
hoard up wealth that such firm impressions will be put on their
backs which will come out after piercing their sides, that such
l
firrn impressions will be put on their forehead that it will come
.
outof their forehead.
Abu Zarr said: I came to the Prophet who was then seated in
j
the shade of the Ka'ba. He said to me: By the Lord of the Ka'ba,
they are undone.
I asked: Who are they? He said: Those who
increase their wealth and not those who spend in this way, in
their fronts, in their backs, in their right sides, in their Ieft sides,
but their numbers are few. Those who have got camels, cattle,
j
sheeps and goats and who do not pay their Zakat will meet with
these animals in huge forms on the Resurrection Day. They will
attack them with their horns and will tread upon them by their
hoofs. If one party go away, another party will come. This will
continue
till the people are brought for judgment. This
punishment has been described by Sahihs Bakhari and Muslim.
So the details of Zakatshould be leamt.
SECTION 1
DIFFERENT KINDS OF ZAKAT
There are six subject matters of Zakat - (1) Zakat of animals,
(2) Zakat of crops, (3) Zakat of gold and silver, (4) Zakat of the
commodities of Business. (5) Zakat of mines and (6) Zakat of Idul
Fitr.

164
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
Vo!-I
(1)
ZAKAT OF ANIMALS: It is compulsory on a free Muslim
whether major or minor, sane or insane. There are five conditions
- of Zakat which is obligatory in case of animals. (a) They are to be
, grazed in the grazing fields. (b) They should not be domestic
animals. (c) They must be in possession of full one year. (d) One
must have full ownership on them. (e) One must be the owner of
Nisab or fixed number of these animals.
(A) Among animals, Zakat is to be paid for camels, cattle,
sheep and groats but not for other animals like horses, asses,
mules, deers and young ones of goats. (B) There is^no Zakat of
domestic animals which do not graze purely in
fields.
(C)
Animals must be in possession of full one year. The Prophet said:
Zakat is not due on any property unless in possession of full one
year. If any animal is sold within one year, there is no Zakat for it.
(D) One must have full ownership and full power of sale of the
animal. There is no Zakat of animals given in pawn or mortgage,
those which are lost or snatched by force. It the debts of a man is
such that all his properties are not sufficient to clear them, there
is no Zakat due on him as he is not a solvent man. A solvent man
is one who has got surplus wealth after necessary expenses (E)
One must possess required number of animals. The minimum
number of camels is five, of cattle thirty, of goats and sheep forty.
Camels-Zakat of one she goat or he-goat of full two years for
every five camels above four. In case of 25 camels, one she camel
or one he- camel of full one year. In case of 36 camels, one she
camel of 2 years, of 46 camels one she-camel of three years and so
on. Cattle. In case of 30 cattle, one calf of one year, of 40 cattle one
calf of two 'years, of 60 cattle two calves of one year. Sheep and
goats. In case of 40 sheep or goats, one she goat of one year, of
120, two she goats and so on.
(2) ZAKAT OF CROPS: If anybody has got twenty maunds
of rice, wheat, maize, pulse, dates or such food stuffs by which a
man can maintain his livelihood, Zakat of one tenth of the crop is
compulsory on him. No Zakat is due for less than 20 maunds.
There is no Zakat on fruits and cotton. If fields are watered by
artificial means by taking water from canals, tanks, drains, then
one twentieth is due on crops.
(3) ZAKAT OF GOLD AND SILVER: Zakat of Silver is one
fortieth of pure silver if not less than 52 1 /2 tolas and gold and
less than 7 1/2 tolas. This is the nisab fixed for which Zakat is
Vol-I
ZAKAT
165
due. This proportion will continue in case of the value of gold
and silver or of things made of them if they are in possession for
full one year. For ornaments of gold and silver which are for use,
there is no Zakat according to Imam Abu Hanifa. Zakat is due on
money on loan after the loan is paid.
(4) ZAKAT ON MERCHANDISE: Zakat on merchandise is
like that of gold and silver. One year should have elapsed from
I
the date of their purchase and if it reaches nisab. This applies also
in case of exchange of goods. Zakat is also payable on profits of
commodities along with the commodities at the end of a year.
(5) ZAKAT ON MINES AND BURIED TREASURERS: If
gold and silver of the non Muslims are found buried, Zakat is
soon due at the rate of one
fifth. There
is no condition of
possession of one year or of nisab. This is just like booty gained in
war. There is no Zakat of the things taken from mines except gold
and silver. Their Zakat is of one fortieth after clearance and after
itreachesNisaband completion of possession of oneyear.
(6) ZAKAT OF ID'UL FITR: This charity is compulsory on
every Muslim who has got food in excess of one day and one
night of I'd at be rate of 2 1 /2 seers of principal food stuffs or one
sa a per head. This is payable on bchalf of all the members of the
family and near relatives and parents who are maintained by
him. The Prophet said: Give the charity of Fitr of all the persons
you maintain.
SECTION 2
PAYMENT OF ZAKAT AND ITS CONDIHONS
Zakat is to be paid having a look to the fol!owing five things.
(1) Intend to pay Zakat at the time when
it falls due and fix
properties and things for payment of Zakat. The guardian of a
minor or an insane man shall pay Zakat on his behalf. The ruler or
his officers can collect Zakat (2) At the completion of one year.
Zakat falls due and it should be paid without delay. Fitr charity is
payable on the day of I'd before I'd prayer. If a man makes delay
in payment of Zakat, he disobeys God. If he loses his property
after
it is due, the responsibility does not cease. Zakat of two
years can be paid in advance. (3) One should not pay Zakat on
valuation of properties. Zakat should be paid with the thing for
which Zakat is due. For instance, silver should not be paid for

166
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
ZAKAT
167
Vol-I
!
i
i
gold and gold
for
silver. The above
is the opinion of Imam
Shafeyi and not of Imam Abu Hanifa according to whom
it is
lawful. (4) It is better to pay Zakat to the people where the Zakat
i
payer resides permanently as the poor and the destitute of that
place look to him for help. (5) Zakat is to be paid to eight classes
of persons as described in the Quran and will be discussed in
section3.
!
SOME SUBTLE RULES OF ZAKAT
There are some subtle points for a payer of Zakat and for one
who travels in the path of the next world.
|
(1)
THE MEANING AND OBJECT OF ZAKAT: Zakat is the
purification of properties. There are three reasons for its being a
pillar of Islam. (a) The first reason is to appreciate the two words
of Kalema Shahadat, to take Tauhid firmly and to witness the
unity of God. Promise reaches perfection when a unitarian has
got no object of love except One, as love does not admit a partner.
j
There is little benefit in uttering Kalima Shahahdat by tongue
only and the trial is in giving up of other objects of love except
I
God. To the people, wealth and properties are objects of love as
they are the instruments of earthly pleasures and getting love
'
from others. Those who claim the love of God are tried and their
objects of love are snatched away from them. For this reason God
says: God purchased from the believers their lives and properties
in exchange of paradise for them. This was said with regard to
Jihad. Sacrifice of properties is easier than sacrifice of life which
has been also mentioned here to gain the love of God. From this
angle of view, men can be divided in to three classes.
(1)
The first class of men recognise Tauhid as true, fulfill their
promise and spend their properties in the way of God. They do
not hoard wealth. They do not deny that Zakat is not compulsory
on them. Rather they say: For us, it is compulsory to spend all our
properties. For this reason, Hazrat Abu Bakr brought all his
properties to the Prophet when he called for charities in the way
of God. Hazrat Omar brought half of his property. The Prophet
said to Hazrat Omar: What have you left for your family? He
j
said: Half of my wealth. He asked Hazrat Abu Bakr: What have
j
you left for your family? He said: God and His Prophet. The
(
Prophet said: The difference between you is in your replied.
|
Vol-I
(2) The second class of men are lower in rank. They spend
their wealth at the time of necessity. The object is hoarding is not
to enjoy pleasure but to spend in proportion to necessity and to
spend their excess wealth in good deeds. They don't reduce the
amount of Zakat. Many Tabeyins like Nakhyi, Shubi, Ata and
others held that there are additional duties on wealth besides
Zakat. The sage Shubi was asked: Is there any additional duty on
wealth besides Zakat? He said: Yes, did you not hear the verse of
God: Being prompted by divine love they spend wealth for their
near relatives, orphans, the poor and the
travellers. This
is
supported by the following verse: They spend out of what I have
provided them with. God says: Spend out of what
I have
provided you. This means that whenever you will find a man in
want,
it is the duty of the rich to remove his want. This is an
additional charity besides Zakat. The correct opinion according
to theology is that whenever expense is necessary, to spend is
Farze Kefayah as it is notlegal to cause harm to the Muslims.
(3) The third class are those persons who rest contended by
payment of only Zakat. They do not pay more or less. This is the
Iowest rank and the general people adopt this course as they are
naturally miser, attached to riches and their love for the next
world is weak. God Says: 'If they beg of you and press for it, you
become miser.' There is a wide gulf of difference between those
who sacrifice their lives and properties for God and those who
are defamed for miserliness.
(2) The second cause is to be pure from miserliness as it is one
of the cause of destruction. The Prophet said: There are three
destructive guilts-to obey miserliness, to follow low desires and
self-conceit. God says: Those who are saved from miserliness
have got salvation. In this way, Zakat is the cause of purification
ofproperties.
(3) The third cause is to express gratefulness for the gifts of
God as God's
gifts on His servants are unbounded. The
gratefulness for the gifts of body by doing divine services and the
gratefulness for the gifts of wealth by expense of wealth are
expressed. How unfortunate
is he who sees no means of
livelihood of a poor man and till does not give him charity inspite
of his begging and who rather expresses gratefulness that God
saved him from wants.

168
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
Vol-I
(2) Second subtle point: It is to look to the times and the rules
of payment of Zakat. The religious men pay Zakat before
it
becomes compulsory. They transcend the limit of time. There is
chance of falling into sin if Zakat is paid late and not in time.
Willingness to do good deed comes from angels and it should be
considered a cause of fortune. The heart of a believer is within the
two fingers of the Merciful and there is no delay in its change.
The devil enjoins on doing evil deeds and shows fear of poverty.
Zakat should be paid in the month of Muharram, the first month
of Hijra and one of the pure months or it should be paid in the
month Ramzan as the Prophet paid most of his charities in this
month and there is the excellence of the Blessed night in this
month and in the month of pilgrimage. The last ten days of
Ramzan month and the first ten days of the month of Zilhaj are
days of excellences.
(3) Third subtle point:
It
is
to pay Zakat in
secret.
It
removes show and greed for fame. The Prophet said: The best
charity is in secret charity of a poor man to a man in want. A
certain learned man said: There are three matters in the secret
wealth of good works, one of them is secret charity. The Prophet
said: If a man acts secretly, God writes it secretly as secrcy is not
maintained if it is disclosed. There a well-known Hadis about
show in open charity. The Prophet said: God will give shade to
seven persons on the day when ther will be no shade except the
shade of God, one who gives charity in such a manner that his
left hand does not know what his right hand has given in
charity. There is in another Hadis: Secret charity appeases the
wrath of God. God says: And if you give charity sincerely, it is
also better for you. In secret charity, one can be safe from the
danger of show. The Prophet said:
If a man wants fame by
incurring the pleasure of men, or rebukes
after charity, or
discloses his charity and thereby seeks name and fame and or
gi ves charity among the people for show, God will not accept his
charity. A secret charity
is free from the above faults. Many
learned men said
that the giver should not even know the
person who takes charity. Some of them handed it over to the
blind.
(4)
Pourth subtle point: It is good to give charity openly in a
place where the people are encouraged to give charity by seeing
it. God says: Spend what I have given you secretly and openly.
Vol-I
ZAKAT
169
Care should be taken in open charity about show, rebuke after
charity and not to break the secrets of a poor man as most of the
beggars do not wish that anybody should see them as beggars.
(5)
Fifth subtle point: It is not to destroy charity by rebuke
and giving trouble after charity. God
says: Don't make your
charity void by
xMann' that
is giving trouble. There are
differences of opinion for the meaning of Mann. Some say that its
meaning is to remind charity to the receiver and that 'Aza' means
to disclose it. Sufiyan was asked: What is Mann? He replied: To
remind
it repeatedly and to discuss about it. Some say that its
meaning is to take boast for giving him charity and 'Aza' means
to drive him away and to rebuke him by words. The Prophet said:
God does not accept the charity of one who does 'Mann'. Gazzali
explains
it thus. Mann has got roof and branches and
it
is
expressed in tongue and limbs. The roof of 'Mann'
is to think
oneself as the benefactor of one who receives charity. Rather the
receiver should consider that he has shown kindness to the giver
by accepting his charity, because he purifies the giver and gives
him release from Hell fire. The charity of the giver is to request
the receiver. The Prophet said: Charity falls on the hand of God
before it falls in the hand of a beggar. Now it appears that the
giver places his charity first to God and then the beggar receives
it from God. 'Mann' comes in when the giver understands that he
has done some benefit to the receiver of charity. So the meaning
of 'Mann' is to discuss about charity, to disclose it and to hope to
get from the receiver gratefulness, prayer, service, honour and to
wish that he should be followed in his actions. These are the
secret meanings of 'Mann'.
'Aza' means to rebuke, to use harsh word and to humiliate
the receiver of charity. Its secret meaning
is unwillingness to
withdraw hand from wealth,
to think
to give charity as
troublesome. Secondly,
it means that the giver thinks himself
superior to the receiver and thinks him inferior for his wants.
Unwillingness to give charity is sign of foolishness, because who
is more foolish than one who is reluctant to spend one dirham in
lieu of one thousand dirhams in the next world? It appears from
this that the object of charity and expense is to get the pleasure of
God and to get merits in the next world. The pious men among
the rich will go to Paradise five hundred years after the pious
poor men. For this reason, the Prophet said: By the Lord of the

170
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
ZAKAT
171
Vol-I
Ka'ba, they are undone. Abu Zarr asked: Who are undone? He
said: Those who have got much wealth/ Then how can the poor
be held in contempt?
God keeps the rich only for the poor, because the poor earn
their livelihood by their industry, increase their provisions and
preserve them with difficulties. Tbe rich give charity according
to the requirements of the poor and guard the excess wealth. So
think that the rich are servants for the livelihood of the poor.
These are the conditions of charity and Zakat. This is like God
fear in prayer. The following Hadis establishes
it. The Prophet
said: There is no prayer for a man except what he understands
therefrom. He said: God does not accept the charity of one who
gives trouble to the receiver. God says: Don't makeyour charity
void by mentioning it and by giving trouble.
j
(6)
Sixth subtle point: Think charity as little, because if it is
considered great, it grows self-praise which destroys an action.
God says: 'When your great number pleased you, it came of no
use to you/ Some say that when one considers a religious action
little, it becomes great to God, and when a sin is considered great,
S
it becomes little to God. Some say that any good deed.does not
become perfect without thre^ things to think it little, to do it soon
and to keep it secret. If a man spends money in the construction
of a mosque, it is possible for him to think it great, but there is no
Mann' or 'Aza' in it. It may be called self-pleasure or self-praise.
Its medicine is a mixture of knowledge and action. Knowledge
comes in the fact that he will not get the highest rank as he has not
gifted his entire wealth in charity and so he should be ashamed,
for this wealth belongs to God and He gives it to whomsoever He
pleaSes along with Taufiq
to spend
it in charity. Regarding
action, charity should be given after being ashamed as you were
miser is not giving the entire property given to you by God.
(7)
Seventh subtle point: Give in charity that is best, puitand
the most lawful thing as God is pure and does not accept but pure
wealth. The Prophet said: 'Good news to the man who earns
wealth without committing sin and spends therefrom/ If he does
not spend out of his best properties, it is impertinent on his part
j
as he reserved the best thing for his family members and loved
f
the worst thing for God. If he gives bad things to his guest for
eating, he becomes surely displeased with him. A wise man
I
should not place others above himself. He will leave no property
I
Vol-I
except what he gives in charity. What he eats finishes and what
he enjoys of his property becomes a past thing. God says: 'O
those who believe, spend of the good things you earn and what I
grow for you out of the earth and don't intend therefrom, impure
things/ Don't take it without dislike and shame. So don't love to
give to God impure and bad things. There
is in Hadis: One
dirham gains over one lac dirhams. Its cause is that a man gives
one dirham in charity with pleasure of mind after taking it out
from mostly his lawful earnings and another man gives charity of
one lac dirhams from his unlawful eamings. God says: They keep
for God what they do not like. Their tongue spread this falsehood
and that this is good for them. There is no doubt that there is Hell
fire for them.
(8)
Eighth subtle point: Search for Zakat such man that if
he is paid Zakat,
it becomes pure. The eight classes of men
have been mentioned in the Quran for Zakat. It should be paid
to those of them who have got these six qualities. (1) God fear:
Seek such God-fearing men who have renunciated the world
and adopted the business of the next world. The Prophet said:
'Don't eat the food of anybody except that of the God-fearing
men and do not feed anybody except the God learning men.
The reason is that such men help religion. The Prophet said:
Give your food to the God- fearing people and show kindness
to the believers. In other words, entertain one with your food
whom you love for the sake of God. Some learned men did not
give food except to the poor people of
'Suffa'. They were
asked: It would have been better if your charity would have
been given to all poor men'. They said: No, the thoughts of
these people are about only for God. When they are hungry,
sensation is generated in their.hearts,. Once a pious man was
about to give up his business and he was going to be a pauper.
Hazrat Juaid came to know of it and gave him some capital and
said: Use it as your capital and don't give up your business as
it is not an unprofitable concern for a man like you. The man
used to carry on the business of vegetables and did not take
price when he sold them to the poor.
(2) The second quality is education as it helps knowledge.
The most honourable divine service
is
to remain busy in the
acquisition of learning with a good and sincere intention. The
sage Ibnul Mobarak used to show kindness to the learned. He

172
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
Vol-I
7n H»
ed
^'i ^°U
.
ld
,
haVe been better if y°u have S‘ve" charity to
all. He said. I don t know whether after prophethood the rank of
any man other than that the learned is superior.
(3) The third quality is truthfulness. Give charity to such a
person who
is truthful and sincere and has got knowledge of
God-fear and Tauhid. His Tauhid
is this that when he accepts
eh3 JlT
pr
r!
ses God
/
exPresses gratefulness and understands
that all the gdtscome from God and not from any intermediary.
bnTan adv,sed hls sorn Between you and God, don't consider
H y a
t
8 'ver 0f gifts and the sifts of another on you as
loan. He who expresses gratefulness to others except to God has
n°t rec°gnised his benefactor and all the people are powerless
except through His help. Had not God compelled thegiver he
r
uld
n
n7
haveg,ven Charity and God intil,ed into his mind that
w
? Veibb
!!nS °f his temporal and spiritual world lies in his charity.
When this behefbecomes strong, his will becomes strong.
V
It
is said that the Prophet sent a man with charity to be
given to a poor man and he said: Remember what he says: The
poor man accepted it and said: Praise be to God who does not
forget one who remembers Him and does not destroy one who
expreses gratefulness to Him. Then he said: O God, you have
not forgotten the man (himselt) and don't allow him to forget
yOU
. Jh? man ,nformed the Prophet of his invocation and he
said being satishcd:
I know that he would say
this. The
rophet said to a man: Make repentance. He said: I repent to
G°d without a partner and not to Muhammad. The Prophet
said: He has recongnised the right of One to whom it is due.
When the verse dealmg with the purity of Hazrat Ayesha was
Proohe^'h
aZra
,‘
u
akr Said: ° Ayesha ' kiss the head of ‘he
ThaM nnr
ra
7
Said: By G°d '
1 shail not d0
il and
I
shali not praise God also for this. The Prophet said: O Abu
.1' gjy
e UP Ayesha. In another anarration, Hazrat Ayesha
said to Hazrat Abu Bakr: Praise be to God and not for you and
n°t (oT y°ur fnend. The Prophet did not deny
it thoueh the
verse dedanng the purity of Ayesha was revealed fo the
rophet. It is the fault of the unbelievers to see other things
u°
d SayS
l When God is remembered, the hearfs
nf
,those w*°
ve
brought faith in the next world become
sad. He who does not purify his heart from the idea of an
mtermediary is not free from secret shirk.
Vol-I
ZAKAT
173
(4) The fourth quality is to conceal wants. Zakat and charity
should be paid to those who try to conceal their wants from the
eyes of men and do not complain of their wants. They are
honourable men. The Prophets have gone away but their honour
remains. They used to live in comfort. God says regarding these
people: The fools think that they are not in want on account of
their refraining from begging. You will know them by their signs.
They do not press the people for begging.' Seek such people in
every locality and give them charity.
The fifth quality is to have a big family with no earning.
Give charity to such a person who has got a big family or who
is diseased, or is confined to the corner of his house on account
of any other reason. God says with regard to these people.
'Those poor men who are confined in the way of God and
cannot move in the world/ In other words, they are confined
in the way of God for members of his family or for scanty
means or for correction of soul or those who cannot roam on
account of their defects in hands and feet are entitled to receive
charity. The Prophet used
to give charity according
to the
number of the members of a family
(6) Another quality is near relationship, as charity to a near
relative brings reward of keeping the tie of blood connection or
relationship. Hazrat Ali said: To gi ve one dirham to my brother is
dearer to me than to give twenty dirhams to a stranger. To give
him twenty dirhams in charity and to keep blood connection
with him is dearer to me than the charity of 200 dirhams to a
stranger. To give him one hundred dirhams is dearer to me than
to set free a slave.
The abvoe are the qualities which should be sought in giving
charity to a person. It will increase reward.
SECTION 3
PITNESS FOR RECEIVING ZAKAT
Know, O dear readers, that there is no Zakat for anybody
except a Muslim who must not belong to the Hashemite dynasty.
Out of eight qualities, one quality is necessary for a receiver of
Zakat. It cannot be paid to an unbeliever, slave, Hashemite, boy
or an insane man except though
his represenatative. The

174
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
Vol-I
descriptions of the eight classes of people who can receive Zakat
are givenbelow.
(1
)
THE POOR: A poor man is one who has got no wealth and
properties and who has got no ability to earn. If he has got one
day s food and wearing cloth, he is not a poor man but a miskin
or destitute. A poor man does not go out of poverty if he has got
abit of begging as begging is not a source of li velihood. If he has
got P°wer and strength to eam his livelihood, he goes out of
poverty. If he is a technician but has got no instrument or money
to purchase it, he can be helped with Zakat. The Prophet said: To
seek lawful earning
is compulsory after compulsory duHes.
here
is mention m
it of eaming livelihood by industry and
trouble. Hazrat Omar said: A doubtful earning
is better than
begging.
If a man
is maintained by his parents, he cannot be
called poor.
(2) MISKIN OR DESTITUTE: A man is called Miskin or
desntute whose expense is greater than his income. He may be
1
owner of one thousand dirhams, but sHH he is a destitute under
the above circumstances.
|
(3) COLLECTORS OF ZAKAT. Out of the earnings of Zakat
collectors of Zakat may be paid. Writer, one who takes measure
and one who copies registers are included within these staffs.
They cannot be paid in excess of their requirements.
(4) THOSE WHO ARE INCLINED TO ISLAM. They are
non-Muslim leaders whose hearts are inclined to the religion of
Islam. The people follow them and therefore if they are inlcined
to Islam, there is possibility of their coming to Islam.
(5) SLAVES BY AGREEMENT: There may be agreement
between a master and
slave that if the slave can pay a certain
sum to the master, he cah get freedom. This money can legally be
paidoutofZakatfund.
h
y
(6) DEBTORS. Zakat may be paid
to clear off debts of a
person who has got no means or clear them or who has property
which is not sufficient to clear them. If a man runs into debts for
haying committed sinful acts,Zakatcannotbe paid to him unless
he repents.
VoH
ZAKAT
175
(7) WARS IN THE WAY OF GOD. Those soldiers who get no
salary from the state Treasury are entitled to get Zakat even if
they are rich.
(8) TRAVELLERS. One who goes abroad with good
intention from his country may get Zakat if he requires money
for his travels. No proof of these wants is necessary. They may be
relied on their verbal words.
DUTIES OF ZAKAT RECEIVER: A Zakat receiver should
look to five matters. (1) He should know that God made Zakat
compulsory so that his thought is concentrated in one object God
says: I created Jinn and man with no other object except that they
shquld worship Me. So divine service should be the centre of
thought of men. He gives wealth to men that it may remove their
wants and they may get opportunity of doing divine service. If
God loves a man among the rich, He saves him from the world as
a physician saves his patient. The poor man should know that
Zakat is a gift from God to him realised from the rich, so that he
may find time for divine service. (2) Be grateful to the Zakat
payer, pray for him and praise him. The rich man should not feel
satisfied as he is only an intermediary to help the poor with the
gift of God. The Prophet said: He who is not grateful to men is not
grateful to God
#
. God Himself praised men for his good actions
though He is the creator of actions and deeds. He said: How good
is the servant/ he is tuming to God - 38
: 30Q. Zakat receiver
should invoke for the payer 'thus: May God purify your heart
and include you among the pious. May He purify your actions
like the actions ot the good and may He include your soul among
the souls of the martyrs. The Prophet said: If a man does good to
yoU/ do good to him. If you cannot do it, pray for him so that he
may understand that you have done him return good. It is the
duty of the giver to think charity as little and the duty of the
receiver to think it great. (3) Don
#
t accept charity if it is not from
lawful wealth. God says: If a man fears God/ He will find out a
way for him and provide him from a source which is beyond his
conception. (4) Give up the charity from eamings of doubtful
nature and take up to your necessity. Don't take it until you know
for certain whether you can legally accept it or not. If you are a
Zakat collector, do not accept in excess of your remuneration. If
you are a traveller, don't accept in excess of what is necessary for
your joumey. If you are a needy man, you may accept what is

176
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
VoH
possess niV/h l
°r °n€ d3y'
is near God fear. unHl he
p
ssess nisab, he may accept it. The Proohet saiH-
.
,
ne
inspite of his being rich will aooear nn
^
d ‘ H
h° begs
his face with scratche»? anH ^
a
the ^esurrection Day with
limit of a
HC WaS asked: «W is the
value. It is equivalent to a proyision lorOTeyea
8"'^ °‘ eqU,Va,ent
SECTION 4
OPTIONAL CHARITY AND ITS EXCELLENCE
you cannot do
it, even bv utterinA
8 i
h ?
ty half a datef
““"
f,,jm h„CKiiTcSj
1"'
asaasaaaasp-agga
somethinrr
( u
T
0k curry' «ncrease its soup and present
family membeL^SropheTs
haVi"8 * l0°k
f° his
the wrath of God. He who eives rh*Hf
7 Ch ^ appeases
hisneed*
'han one wh° ‘ak« itat thetoe^
Yourcha^arthTtirwh^^ WWCh Chari* S^ «e said:
Wish to spend, wLn you hope°to r
'' S
?
Und ' When y°U do
hunger. Don't make dLy^iWne^tari* le
r
sr
hen y°U fcar
when you will be dying- 1 give this
u
* y°U may Say
thing to such oerson Onfh
ru
„ g t0 SUch Person and this
Oneman said:7hTve go, a d"na
G ‘Ve CharitY-
said: I have got ano,hefd‘nar. Hesa”d snendTtT
“ f°r y°U He
said:Ihavegotanotherdinar Heca.H
j
tjoryour wife. He
He said:
I Le
servant. He said: I have eot anothe Hin*r w'
!, V* f°r your
bes, for
it. The Prophet said: Zakat is not Wul^hl Tmily
VoI-I
2AKAT
n*® ofMuhammad. It is the impurity of the people. He said:
nf
heJ
e
^
Uk^°l
a^eggarbygivingfoodeven to themeasure
of the head of a bird. The Prophet said: He will not get salvation
who refuses a beggar who speaks the truth. Jesus Christ said:
Angels do not enter the house of a man for seven days who tums
out a beggar from his door disappointed. Our Prophet did not
entrust two duties to anybody-to collect his water of ablution for
lus prayer at mght and to give charity to the poor. The Prophet
said: He who is driven away by you not even with two dates is
not a destitute but a destitute is he who refrains from begging. If
you wishy read this verse: They do not come to man begging. The
Prophet said: A Muslim who gives a cloth to another Muslim is in
protection ofGod till the cloth remains upon his body.
Wise sayings: Harat Urwah-b-Jubair narrated that some time
Hazrat Ayesha gave charity of 50,000 dirhams though her shirt
was stitched. God says: They give food out of His love to the
destitute, ophans and captives. Mujahed explained this verse by
saying that they did it out of eagemes. Hazrat Omar said: O God,
give riches to the good among us, that they may do benefit to the
ueedy
; ^hph Omar-b-Abdul Aziz said: Prayer will take you to
half of the royal path, fast will take you to the royal door and
chanty will take you to the king himself. Ibn Abi Zaidan said:
Charity shuts up 70 doors of evils. The excellence of secret charity
is seventy times more than that of open charity and secret charity
destroys seventy evils. Hazrat Ibn Masud said that a man did
divine seryice for seyenty years. Then he committed a grievous
sm for which his entire good deeds were rendered Void. Then he
passed by a poor man and gave a bread to him for which God
forgave him and returned
I im the rewads of the divine senices
f°r seventy years. Loqman adviced his son: When you commit a
sin, give charity. Hazrat Ihya-b-Muaz said: I don't know whether
a seed except a seed of charity is heavier than a mountain. Caliph
Abdul Aziz said: Paradise has got three secret tresures to conceal
disease,
to conceal charity and
to conceal troubles and
difficulties. The saint Nakhyi said: When a thing is given in
charity for God, I don t like that it should have any defect. Hazrat
Obaid-b-Umair said: On the Resurrection Day, a man will get
hungry not being hungry, thirsty not being thirsty and naked
Without being naked. God will give food to one who gives food
for the sake of God. He will give water to drink to one who gives
water to drink for the sake of God. He will give cloth to one who

178
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
Vol-I
gives cloth for the sake of God. Hazrat Hasan Basari said: If God
willed, all* would have been rich and nobody would have been
poor among you, but He wishes to try you by one another.
BENEFITS OF SECRET CHARITY
(1) It protects the secrecy of the receiver of charity. In open
charity, his manliness is curbed and his want is exposed. The
secret charity gives no encouragement to begging.
(2) The
receiver remains safe from the tongues of the people. Many a
time, the receiver
is hated by the people in case of open
acceptance of charity. The sage Abu Ayub said: I gave up putting
on new cloth for fear of creating hatred in the mind of my
neighbour.
(3-) Secret charity helps the giver to conceal his
charity, as the excellence of secret charity is greater than that of
open charity. To help the perfection of a good deed is also a good
deed. One man gave charity to a Sufi in presence of the Prophet.
He did not accept it. (4) There is no disgrace in accepting secret
charity. It is not the duty of a befiever to humiliate anybody. A
certain learned man refused to accept charity openly as he said
that it disgraces learning. (5) Secret charity removes the doubts of
a cosharer. The Prophet said: If a man is given prsent in presence
of some men, then
all become cosharers in the present. The
Prophet said: The best charity to a brother is his giving food or
money.
BENEFITS OF OPEN CHARITY: (1)
If
it
is given with
sincerity and honesty, one can be safe from change of condition
and show. (2) Honour is removed and humility is exposed. (3)
One can remain safe from Shirk in case of open charity. It
is
narrated that a spiritual guide was indined to one of his disciples
more than
to anybody else. This gave trouble to his other
disciples. The spiritual guide intended to expose the supremacy
of his favoured one and therefore he gave to each of his disciples
one cock with a knife saying: You will sacrifice it so that nobody
sees it. Each of them went to a distant place and sacrified his cock
except the disciple whom he Ioved. The atter retumed the cock
and the knife to him without sacrifing it. The spiritual guide said
to him: They have brought the cocks according to my instruction
but why did you not bring it accordingly? He said: I have found
no place where nobody could see me as God sees me in every
place. The guide then said to his other disciples: For this reason, I
am inclined more to this disciple as his look is always towards
Vol-I
2AKAT
179
God. (4) In case of open charity, the sunnat of gratefulness is
expressed. God says: As for the gifts of your Lord, prodaim it. To
conceal a gift is like rejecting it. If a man conceals what has been
giyen to him by God, God rebukes him. He attached
it with
miserliness. God says: Those who are misers and tell the people
to be misers and conceal of the gifts which God has given them/
T
,he ProPhet said: If God 8lyes a gift to a servant, He likes that it
should be expressed by him. The Refugees asked the Prophet
cmce about gratefulness; O Messenger of God, we are guests of
the Ansars and we have not seen better people than them. Thev
have divided their wealth and properties among us, we fear that
they would take all rewards. The Prophet said: The gratefulness
areyour
6X
t
PreSS t0
^
hem for every matter and your praising them
When you have understood about the benerits of open
c anty and secret charity, you have come to know that the
differences arise out of conditions of mind. So it depends on the
state of your mmd at the time of charity. The Prophet praised a
.
man, because he knew that it would not injure him. He once said
to a man: When any honourable man of a tribe comes to ydu
honour him, The Prophet once was pleased with a man when he
heard °f his quality and said: There is surely a charm in oratory.
l
S
u
d ’ ^hen anybody among y°u finds a good
ttnbute m his brother, let him tell him of it, as it will give him
encouragement to do good works. The Prophet said: When a
believer is praised, faith increases in his mind. Suriyan Saori said:
raise cannot injure a man who knows his mind.

Vol-I
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
181
CHAPTER VI
FASTING
Fast is one-fourth of faith, as the Prophet said: Fast is half of
patience and patience is half of faith. Of all the regulations of
religion, fast keeps special connection with God. The Prophet
said: God says: Every good action except fast will be rewarded
from ten to seven hundred folds, but fast is only for My sake and
it is I who will reward him for it. God says: Those who are patient
will be given rewards without measure - 39
: 13. Fast is half of
patience. Its reward transcends account. The excellence of fast is
known from the fo!lowing Hadis: The Prophet said: By One in
whose hand there is my
life, the fragrance of the mouth of a
fasting man is dearer to God than the fragrance of musk. God
says: The fasting man gives up sexual intercourse, found says:
The fasting man gives up sexual intercourse, food and drink for
My sake. So fast is kept only for My sake and it is
I who will
reward him for
it. The Prophet said: Paradise has got a gate
named Rayyan. None except a fasting man will enter Paradise by
that gate. God has promised His vision as reward of fast.
The Prophet said: There are two joys for a fasting man - one
joy at the time of breaking fast and another joy at the time of
f
meeting with his Lprd. The Prophet said: Everything has got a
gateway. Fast is the gateway of worship. He said: The sleep of a
j
fasting man
is worship. He said: When the month of Ramzan
j
comes, the gates of Paradise are opened and the gates of Hell are
shut up, the devils are put in chains and a prodaimer proclaims:
O seeker of good, advance. O seeker of evil, come back. God says:
Eat and drink cheerhilly for what you missed in past days. In
other words, eat and drink cheerfully for what you were
deprived in your tasting days. The Prophet said: God will make
j
His angels view with an ascetic saying: O young man who has
1
suppressed his passions for My sake and who has spent his youth
s
forMy sake, you are to Me like some ofMy angels.
|
The Prophet said about a tasting man: God says: O My
!
angels, look to My servant, he has given up his sexual passion,
his pleasures, his food and drink for My pleasure. God says: 'No
|
soul knows what has been kept concealed for him pleasing to his
eyes. This is the reward for what they have done' . It has been said
regarding the verse that this action was fast, as God says: The
patient will be given rewards without account (39 : 13). It appears
from this that rewards will be open for the fasting men and they
will not be kept for measurement as
it
is only for God. All
worships are for God but the honour of fast is like that of the
Ka'ba. Everything in the world has got a speciality. The speciality
of fasting is forbearance and sacrifice, as it is the action of the
mind and secret from public eye, but all other actions fall within
human eyes. Nobody sees fast except God as it is a secret action
with sincere patience. Secondly, it is punishment for the enemy
of God as the way of the devil is sexual passion and it increases
through the help of food and drink. For this reason, the Prophet
said: The devil runs through human body like the circulation of
blood. Curb it by hunger. For this reason, the Prophet said to
Ayesha; Knock at the door of Paradise. She asked: How? The
Prophet said: With hunger, specially when fast controls the devil,
shut his path and make narrow his passage. Then its connection
remains with only God. If the enemy of God is controlled, it will
be helping God.
God says: If you help God, God will help you and will make
your feet firm - 47
: 8. So at the beginning, a servant will make
efforts and thpn hope for reward of God. For this reason, God
Says: I will show certainly My path to those who strive hard for us
(29
: 69). God says: God does notchange the condition of a people
unless they change their own condition (13
: 12). This change is
said to be due to increase of sexual passion as it is the grazing
field of the devil and a place for his movement. The devil moves
in it till it is fertile. God's light is not disclosed to the person in
whom he moves. The Prophet said: If the devil had not moved in
the human minds, they could have surely known the mysteries of
heaven. For this reason, fast is the door of worship and its shield.
When the excellence of fast
is so wide,
its secret and open
conditions and its rules and regulations should be known and
they will be discussed in three sections.
SECTION
SIX COMPULSORY DUTIES OF FAST
(1) To seek the new moon of Ramzan. If there is cloud, thirty
days of Shaban must be completed. The sight of the new moon of
Ramzan is based only on the evidence of one just man of intellect.

182
FASHNG
Vol-I
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
183
Vol-I
while the moon of I'dul Fitr is based on the evidence of two just
pious Muslims. If the new moon is seen in one place and is not
seen in another place and if the distance between the two places
in less than about two miles, it is compulsory for the inhabitants
of both the places to keep fast. If however the distance is more,
the inhabitants of each place will decide the case separately.
(2) TO MAKE NIYYAT OF FASTING: To make niyyat every
night with firm faith is compulsory. One niyyat for full Ramzan
month is not sufficient. If there is no niyyat of compulsory fast, it
will he considered as optional fast. So niyyat should be made
every night.
(3) No
to admit anything outside in the body willingly
during fast. If a man eats something, drinks something and does
any such act, it will break fast. If a man gets cupping, it will not
spoil his fast. If water enters the belly unwillinely,
it will not
spoil fast.
(4) Abstinence from sexual intercourse during
fast.
If
through mistake, a fasting man has got sexual intercourse, it will
not spoil his fasting.
(5) Abstinence from deliberate emission of semen.
If
deliberately semen is emitted, it will break fast.
*
(6) Abstinence from deliberate vomiting. Wilful vomiting
breaks fast.
ATONEMENT FOR BREAK OF A FAST
There are four modes of compulsory atonement of fast if it
breaks.
(1) Making amends.
It is compulsory on every major
Muslim to keep fast on other days for break of fast in Ramzan. A
menstruating woman must compulsorily keep fast on other days.
One need not keep Qaza fast consequitively.
(2) Kaffara or
Atonement is not compulsory except in case of sexual intercourse
in which case one is to set free a slave or fast for two consequitive
months, failing that to feed sixty poor men with one meal. (3)
Imsak or refraining oneself from food drink, and from sexual
intercourse. If a man breaks fast carelessly but without excuse, it
is compulsory on him to refrain from food, drink and sexual
intercourse for the remaining portion of the day. (4) Fidya or
expiation: if a pregnant or suckling woman does not keep fast for
fear of her child, it is compulsory on her to give its compensation
by giving one Mud food-stuff to a poor man and she will have to
fast Qaza in addition. If an old-man of age is unable to keep fast,
he may compensate each fast by giving food crops of one Mud for
each day.
SUNNATS OF FAST ARE SIX: (1) To eat Sehri latter, (2) to
break fast before Magrib prayer with dates or water, (3) not to
cleanse teeth after mid-day (4) to give charity, (5) to recite the
Quran, (6) and to observe I' tekafin a mosque in the last ten nights
of Ramzan month. This was the habit of the Prophet of God.
When the ten nights of Ramzan remained, he prepared himself
for greater divine service for the remaining days of Ramzan and
ordered the inmates of the house to do the same. He used to stay
in the mosque without coming out of it except when pressed by
necessity such as calls of nature.
SECTION 2
SECRETS OF FAST
Know, O dear readers, that there are three classes of fast. (1)
fast of the general Muslims. It is to restrain oneself from eating
and drinking and from sexual passion. This is the lowest kind of
fast. (2) Fast of the few select Muslims. In this kind of fasting,
besides the above things, one refrains himself from sins of hands,
feet, sight and other limbs of body. (3) Fast of the highest class.
These people keep fast of mind. In other words, they don't think
of anything else except God and the next world. They think only
of the world with the intention of the next world as it is the seed
ground for the future. A certain sage said: One sin is written for
one whose efforts during the day are made only to prepare for
breaking fast. This highest class of people are the Prophets and
the near ones of God. This kind of fast is kept after sacrihcing
oneself and his thoughts fully to God. This is the meaning of the
verse: Say God and then leave them sporting in their vain talks
(6:91).
The fasting of select for pious men rests on six duties for
gaining perfection. (1) To restrain eye sight from what is evil and
from things which divert attention from God's remembrance.
The Prophet said: Eye sight is a poisonous arrow oiit of the
arrows of the devil. If a man gives it up, God gives him such a
faith of which the taste is tasted by his mind. The Prophet said:

184
FASHNG
Vol-I
Five things destroys fasting
- talsehood, back-biting/ slander
perjury and sight with sexual passion. (2) To restrain the tongue
from useless talk, false-speaking/
back-biting, slander, abusive
speech, obscemty, hypocrisy and enmity, to adopt silence and to
nTo
the t01^
Ue buSy with the remembrancc of God and reciting
u
eJ
age
.f
ufiyan S*™“id: Back-biting spoils fast
^
U^?h^
Sa*d: Two thin6s sP°il fast, back-biting and
J
aiseh00d * The Pr°Phet
Bast is like a shield. If a man keeps
tast
let him not rebuke and dispute. If a man wants to assault or
make ^uarret let him say to him: I am fasting. There is in Hadis:
Two women kept fast at the time of the Prophet. They were so
much overstickens with hungers at the end of the day that their
lives were about to end. They were sent to the Prophet so that he
^
ht or
f
er them ‘o break fast. He sent a cup for them telling
them that they should vomit in it what they ate. One of them
vomitted fresh blood and fresh flesh which tilled up half of the
cup. Another vomitted similarly and
filled up the cup. The
Prophet then said: The two women fasted with lawful food but
broke
it with unlawful food. The two women back-bited the
people and ate their flesh.
(3) To restrain the ear from hearing the evil talks because
what » unlawful to utter is also unlawful to hear. For this reason,
Godplaced the eater of unlawful food and the hearer of unlawful
words on the same level. God says: The hearers of falsehood and
eaters of unlawful food
- 5:46. God says: Why do not the God-
rearing men and the worldly renunciated men prohibit talking
sinful words and unlawful eating - 5:68? To remain silent at the
tl5',e
.^ft
b2?"blting 1S unlawful< God says: You ar then like them
u
i
971™8 said the Prophet: The back-biter and the hearer of
Dack-biting are equal cosharers in sin.
(4) To sa ve hand, feet and other organs from sins, from evil
deeds and to save belly from doubtful things at the time of
breaking fast. There is no meaning of fasting if it is kept with
Iawful food and broken with unlawful food. He is like a man
who destroys a town for constructing a building.
It is also
injurious to eat lawful food in excess and hot to eat it little. He
who fasts and does evii deeds is like a patient who restrains
himself from eating fruits for fear of disease but who swallows
poison. A sin is like eating poison. He who drinks this poison
is a
fool, An unlawful thing
is like poison and
it destroys
Vol-I
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
185
religion and a lawful thing is like a medicine.
Its
little does
benetit and its much spoils. The Prophet said: There are many
fasting men who do not gain by fasting except hunger and thirst.
On being asked the reason, he said: He refrains from eating
lawful food and breaks fast by eating human flesh by back-biting.
Thatisunlawful.
(5) To eat even lawful food so much at the time of breaking
fast that it fills up the belly. A belly tilled up with too much
lawful food is hated more than all other reservoirs. A fasting man
eats in full at the time of breaking fast what he could not eat
during day time. He prepares different kinds of foods. The object
of fast is to keep belly vacant in order to control passion and to
increase God-fear.
If the belly remains
full from moming
to
evening/ sexual passion rises high and greed and temptation
reign supreme.
(6) To keep the mind of a fasting man between fear and hope,
because he does not know whether his fast will be accepted or
not, whether he will be near God or not. This should be the case
for every divine service. Once Hasan Basri was passing by a party
of men who were playing and sporting. He said: God made this
month of Ramzan for running in which the people will be
mnning for good deeds and competing vVith one another. The
object of fast is to anoint one with one of the divine attributes.
That attributes. That attribute is Samadiat meaning to be bereft of
hunger and thirst and to follow the angels as far as possible being
free from passion. The rank of a man is far more superior than
that of a lov/er animal as he can control his passion by dint of his
intellect, but his rank is lower than that of an angel as his passion
is strong and he is tried by it. Angels are near God. This nearness
keeps connection with attribute but not with space. The Prophet
said: Fast is a trust. Let everyone of you keep that trust. When he
read this verse. "God orders you to give tmst to
its rightful
owners (4
: 61)." he placed his hands on his ears and eyes and
said: Ear is a tmst and eye is a tmst. If it had not been a trust of
fasting/ the Prophet would not have said: I am fasting. In other
words, I have kept my tongue as tmst for saving it. How can I
give it up for repl)dng you? So
it appears that for every affair
there are secret and open matters.
It
is now open to you
to
observe both the secret and open matters or to observe either of
them.

186
FASTING
VoI-I
SECTION 3
OPTIONAL FAST AND ITS RULES
°
L d?
r readers that addiHonal fasls are sunnat
if
bserved m the days of good and excellence. Some of these days
cur every year, some every month and some every week Those
which occur every year are the days of Arafatf the days of
Ashura, the first ten days of the month of Zilhaj, thefirst tendays
Tn‘h °f Muharram a"d all holy months. The Proph-t
™S!
in the month of Shaban. There is in one Hadfs
^nhemonhntMn
0 ”* °f fhe m°nth °f Ram2an' the
faat
?
,
themo
h of Muharram as lt,s ‘he beginning of the year and
One d
d
'
f 8.°°d and most dear for blessing. The Prophet said:
One day s fast in the holy month is better than the fast for thirty
other days. The Prophet said:
If a man
fasts for three days
him H
day' Fnday
Saturday in the holy month God writes for
him drnne service of seven hundred years in lieu of every day
here ls in Hadis: When half of Shaban passes, there is nofast up
before Ram2an
S
^ !° keeP faS‘ for two or three days
before Ramzan. Zil-ha), Muharram, Rajab and Shaban are the
months of excellence and
Jil Qaedah, Zil-Haj, Muharram and
Rajab are the holy months, Zil-Haj is the best among them as
there is therein the day of Haj and fixed days. There i/jn Hadis-
t?aTLT
V1C
!k
°r the f
l.
rSt ten days of Zil'ha)
dearer to God
eouaMo fast°nf
CT
T'
°‘ °ne day durin« these days is
equal to fast of one year and one nighps prayer is eoual to the
ThTt
y
of nh
h
d?i
eSSed ni®ht
asked: ls the tewardbetter than
tha t of Jihad? He sa.d: Not that of even Jihad in the way of God,
but the reward is equal to that of the Jihad of a man in which his
horse is wounded and he himselt is martyred.
kentMO
AST: The dayS of month in which fast are to be
kept are Ihc first day, middle day and the last day of everv month
!
n
5tfofre
n
moon
e "^** °f^ 1" B‘2 °n ‘he 13th' Mth and
WEEKLY FAST: In every week, Thursday, Friday and
Monday are good. These are the days of ekcellence^
hm.ViINU
ik' !
AST: The **** way is t0 keeP fast fer one day and
break it on the following day; The Prophet said: The treasures of
heWOrld were Presented ‘o me- 1 rejected them and said: I shaH
remain hungry for one day and take food on another. When
I
Vol-I
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
187
shall take food,
I shall praise thee and when
I shall remain
hungry I shall seek humility from Thee. The Prophet said: The
best fast is that of my brother Daud. He fasted for are day and
broke
it on the following day. The Prophet instructed
Abdullah-b-Amr to fast thus. He said: I shall be able to fast more.
The Prophet said: Fast for one day and break fast on the following
day. He said: I wish to keep better fast than this. Then the Prophet
‘said: There
is no better fast than
this.
It is reported that the
Prophet did not fast any full month except Ramzan.
It has been reported that the Prophet sometimes continued to
fast in such a way that the people thought that he won't break it
and sometimes he continued
to keep no
fast
till
the people
thought that he won't keep fast. He slept sometimes in such a
way that the people thought that he won't rise from bed and
sometimes he kept wakeful in such a way that the people thought
that he won't sleep again.

i
CHAPTER VII
SECRETS OF PILGRIMAGE
I
Pilgrimage is one of the pillars of Islam, the beauty of divine
|
service for the whole life, the end of actions, the perfection of
Islam and the foundation of religion. On the day of pilgrimage,
I
God revealed the following verse: Today I have perfected your
religion for you and made My gifts perfect on you and
I am
j
pleased to give you Islam as a religion -5:3. The Prophet said
\
regarding
it: He who dies without making pilgrimage, dies
I
willingly as a Jew or a Christian/ So how important is that divine
I
service without which religion does not become perfect and one
becomes a Jew or a Christian or a misguided one.
It
will,
|
therefore, he discussed in three sections.
I
SECTION
EXCELLENCE OF PILGRIMAGE: God says: Proclaim Haj
among the people, so that they may come to you on foot or upon
every camel coming from every distant place (Quran). Qatadah
said: God ordered Hazrat Abraham, our Prophet and all chosen
|
servants - Proclaim Haj among their people. Then he proclaimed:
O people, God created a house, make pilgrimage for it. God says:
'that they may witness benefits for them'.
It means trade and
rewards in the next world. A certain sage said about it: By Lord of
j
the Ka'ba, He has forgiven them. God mentions the devil as
saying: I shall sit for them in your straight path. Some say that the
devil will be sitting in the paths towards Mecca to prevent the
people from making pilgrimage. The Prophet said: He who
I
makes pilgrimage without doing any obscene deed and without
making quarrel comes out of his sins as on the day when his
mother gave birth to him. The Prophet said: The devil does not
become so much humiliated, dishonoured and disgraced as on
the day of Arafat. The cause
is that he sees God's blessings
descending and His forgiveness of great sins. The Prophet said:
there
is some sins out of sins which are not forgiven except
without waiting at Arafat. The Prophet said: If a man comes out
of his house with the intention of making pilgrimage or Umrah,
there will be written for him the rewards of one pilgrimage and
one Umrah up to the Resurrection Day. He who dies at Mecca or
Medina, will not be presented for account and no account will be
taken from him and he will be said: Enter Paradise. The Prophet
|
Vol-I
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
189
said: There is no rewards except Paradise for an accepted Haj.
The Prophet said: Those who make pilgrimage and Umrah are
guests and neighbours of God. If they pray, it is accepted from
them. If they seek forgiveness, God forgives them. If they invoke,
their invocation
is accepted.
If they intercede,
it is accepted.
There is in another Hadis: He whose sins are greatest is a person
who thinks at Arafat that God has not forgiven his sins. The
Prophet said: 120 blessings descend everyday on this Ka'ba sixty
for those who make Tawaf, forty for those who pray and twenty
for those who visit the Ka'ba. There is in Hadis: Make much
Tawaf because it is such a great thing that you will find it in your
book of deeds on the Resurrection day and for which people will
envy you. For this reason, to make Tawaf at first before Haj and
Umrah is commendable. There is in Hadis: He who makes Tawaf
for a week barefooted and bare bodies will get the reward of
setting free a slave. Whose makes Tawaf in rains for a week, his
past sins are forgiven. A certain sage said: If the Arafat Day and
the Jumma Day occur on the same day, every person at Arafat is
forgiven and that is the best day in the world. On that day the
farewell pilgrimage of the Holy Prophet took place and on that
day, the verse was revealed - To-day I have perfected for you
your religion, bestowed My favours completely on you and
chosen for you Islam as a religion - 5 : 53.
The people of the Book said: If the verse would have been
revealed upon us, we would have observed it as a day of festival.
Hazrat Omar said: I bear witness that this verse was revealed on
the Prophet on the day of two festivals, the day of Arafat and.
Jumma day and he was then waiting at Arafat. The Prophet said:
Forgive one who has come for pilgrimage, O God, forgive one
who seeks forgiveness for a pilgrim. Hazrat Omar said: A pilgrim
is forgiven and also the man for whom he seeks forgiveness in
Zilhaj, Muharram, Safar or the first part of Rabiul Awal. It was
the custom of the ancient sages that they broadcasted the stories
of warriors, welcomed the pilgrims, kissed on their foreheads,
sought blessings from them and they hastened to do these things
before they would commit sins.
EXCELLENCE OF MECCA AND KA'BA
The Prophet said: God promised that every year sft lacs
people will make pilgrimage. If their number becomes lesS, God
will fill the number by angels. The Ka'ba will be presented on the
P

190
SECRETS OF PILGRIMAGE
Vol-I
Resurrection Day, adomed with omaments like a newly wedded
bride and those who made pilgrimage will be busy in covering it
with cloth. The Ka
rba will proceed towards Paradise till itenters
it and they will also enter paradise. There is in Hadis: The Black
Stone is a jewel out of the jewels of Paradise. It will be raised
upon the Resurrection Day. It will have two eyes and one tongue
with which it will speak. It will bear witness for everyone who
kissed it and testified its tmth. The Prophet used to kiss it much.
It was narrated that Hazrat Omar once made prostration over it.
He was then making Tawaf riding and he placed his staff in his
hand on it and kissed one end of it. He said once after kissing it: I
know certainly that you are a mere piece of stone and you can not
do any benefit or harm. Had I not seen the Prophet kissing you, I
would never kissed you. Then he wept and raised his voice high.
Then he said to Hazrat Ali behind him: O Abul Hasan, take
advice and intercede, your prayer will be accepted. Hazrat Ali
said : O Commander of the Faithful, it has got benerits and harms
He asked: In what way? He said: When God took promise from
the descendants of Adam, He wrote a scroll on them and
impressed
it on this stone.
It will bear witness for those who
fulfilled
their promise and against the infidels for infidelity.
Hasan Basari said: One da/s fast therein is equal to one Iac fast
and charity of one Dirham is equal to that of one lac dirhams
Thus
lts reward increases to one lac. There is in Hadis: One
Umrah during Ramzan is like pilgrimage with me. He said: I
shall be the first man who will burst out of his grave. Then the
inhabitants of Jannatual Baqi will resurrect with me, then the
Meccans and then the people between the two Harams (Mecca
and Medinah). There is in Hadis that when Adam periormed all
ntes of pilgrimage, the angels saw him and said: O Adam your
Haj has been accepted. We built the Ka'ba two thousand years
before you. There is in Hadis that God looks to the inmates of the
world every night. He looks first to the inhabitants of Mecca and
out of them first to the inhabitants of the Ka'ba. He forgives one
whom He sees making Tawaf and forgives one whom he sees
standing towards the Ka'ba and forgives one whom He sees
praying in the Ka ba. A friend ofGod said: The sun does not set in
unless an Abdal makes Tawaf of the Ka'ba and it does not set in
unless a friend of God makes its Tawaf. When this sort of Tawaf
will end, it will be the cause of being lifted away from the world.
Then the people will see in the moming that it has been lifted
away andthey will find no sign therein. Then after it, nobody will
Vol-I
191
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
make its pilgrimage for seven years. The Anti Christ will appear
and Jesus Christ will come down and will kill Anti Christ. Then
the Resurrection will come near. There is in Hadis: Before its
lifting, the Ka'ba will be circumbulated always. The Ka'ba was
twice destroyed and
it will belifted up at the third time. The
Prophet said: God says: When I will wish to destroy the world, I
will begin it first with My house and will destroy it first. Then
immediately after it the world will be destroyed.
EXCELLENCE OF HABITATION AT MECCA
The God fearing men disliked to live at Mecca for three
reasons. (1) Fear of being equal to Ka'ba, as to be equal from the
point of honour
is harmful. When the pilgrims finished
pilgrimage, Hazrat Omar assembled them and said: O
inhabitants of Yemen, go to Yemen, O inhabitants of Iraq, go to
Iraq. He said: I fear lest the people inhabit too much in the Ka'ba.
(2) Eagerness for visiting it again owing to separation, as. God
made the Ka'ba as a refuge of the people and a safe place. (3) Not
to live at Mecca for fear of sins and guilts is better than honouring
the place. Hazrat Ibn Masud said: There is no such city except
Mecca wherein the people will be punished for niyyat before
actions. Then he read this verse: If a man wishes therein to do
.
excessive oppression, he will be given grievous punishment.
This is only forthe Ka'ba. Hazrat Ibn Abbas said: To store up
food stuffs at Meccais said to be excessive oppression within the
precincts of the Ka'ba. He said: To commit seventy sins at Ruqia
is better to me than to commit a sin at Mecca. Ruqia is a place
between Mecca and Tayef. Some people feared so much that they
even responded not to their calls of nature in the sacred
enclositre. It is better to live at Mecca if anybody does not commit
any sin. When the Prophet retumed to Mecca, he tumed his face
towards the Ka'ba and said: 'You are the best place to me among
the places of God and you are the dearest city to me among the
cities of God. Had I not been ejected from you, I would never
come out of it?' Why should it notbe, as look towards the Ka'ba is
worship and
if a good deed is done there,
it brings abundant
rewards.
EXCELLENCE OF MEDINAH
There is no such better place as Medinah after Mecca. The
rewards increase much if a gpod deed is done at Medina. The

192
SECRETS OF PILGRIMAGE
Vol-I
Prophet Said: One prayer in my mosque brings rewards one
tnousand times more than the prayer in other mosques except the
mosque of Mecca/ This is true in case of all good deeds done
here. After Medinah, there
is the place of Baitu! Muqaddas
wherem a prayer brings rewards five hundred times more than
thatm other mosques. This is the case with all other good deeds.
The Prophet said: If one prayer in the mosque of Medinah
is
equal to ten thousand prayers, one prayer in Baitul Muqaddas is
equal to one thousand prayers and one prayer in the mosaue of
Mecca is equal to one lac prayers. The Prophet said: If a man
bears hardships of Medinah,
I shal! be his intercessor on the
Resurrection Day. The Prophet said:
'If a man can die at
Medinah, let him do it because if a man dies at Medinah, I shall be
his intercessor on the Resurrection Day/ After these three places
all places are equal except the frontters of Islam, as guarding the
frontiers of Islam
is necessary from the enemies and their
excellence is great. For this reason, the Prophet said: Don't tie
your camel except in three mosques, the mosque of the Ka'ba, the
mosque of mine and the mosque of Baitu! Muqaddas. The
Prophet said: I had prohibited you before to visitgraves, butnow
I say:
Visit graves, but don't say 'Hazran'
(I gave up). The
Prophet said: All places belong to God and all are servants of
God. Live in th place you like and praise God. There is in Hadis: If
a man Sets blessings in a thing, he should sttck to it. If a man eets
a source of income, he should not change it, till that source of
mcome is changed.
DUTIES OF HAJ
Two things are necessary for the health of Hai-Time and
Islam. There are five condittons of Haj which are obligatory - (1)*
to be a Muslim, (2) to be a free man, (3) to be intelligent and able,
(4) to be major, (5) to make Haj in time. One must be of sound
health and the route must be safe and sound. He must have
sufficient money to go and to be back from joumey and for the
maintenance of the family in the mean ttme. If a man is unable to
make pilgrimage on account of his physical illness or bodily
mnnruty from which he has got no hope of recovery, he must
send his representatwe with expense to make pilgrimage. A son
may not take money from his father to make pilgrimage on behalf
of his father. If a man dies before making pilgrimage inspite of his
solvency, there will be grievous punishment for him. Hazrat
Vol-I
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
193
Sayeed-b-Jubair, Ibrahim Nakhyi, Muzahed and Taus said: If we
knew that a certain man died without making Haj, we did not say
funeral prayer for him. Hazrat Ibn Abbas said:
If a man dies
without Haj and without paying Zakat, he will pray for return to
the world. Then he read this verse: O my Lord, send me again
that I may do good deeds which I Ieft undone.
FIVE COMPULSORY DUTIES OF HAJ: To make Ihram, to
make Tawaf, to make Sayee, to wait at Arafat and then to shave
hairs. These are also compulsory in Umrah except waiting at
Arafat.
SIX WAJEB OF HAJ: To make Ihram at the appointed place,
(2) to throw pebbles at Mina, (3) to wait at Arafat till sunset, (4) to
spend the night at Muzdalafah, (5) to stay at Mina, (6) and to
make Tawaf of the Ka'ba at the ttme of farewell.
MODES OF HAJ: Haj can be performed in three modes - (1)
Ifrad, (2) Qeran and (3) Tamattu. The mode of making pilgrimage
by Ifrad is the best. Ifrad is a kind of pilgrimage in which Ihram is
made with the sole intention of Haj and not Umrah and Ihram is
broken after the necessary duties are performed. Then Ihram is
made for Umrah. (2) In the Qeran Haj, Ihram is made for both Haj
and Umrah at the same time. (3) In Tamattu Haj, first lhram is
made for Haj before it actually takes place. Ihram is made at the
fixed place and then the pilgrim comes to Mecca and breaks it.
Just before Haj, he again makes Ihram and breaks it after Haj and
thereafter makes Tawaf. When there is no Ihram, everything can
be enjoyed even sexual intercourse with wife. There are some
conditions in Tamattu Haj
- (1) not to be included within th
people of Ka'ba.
(2)
to make Umrah before Haj,
(3) to make
Umrah in the months of pilgrimage, (4) not to go to a distance for
making Ihram for Haj, (5) to make Haj and Umrah by the same
person. it is compulsory for such a pilgrim to sacrittce a goat. If he
cannot do it, he will fast before sacrittce for three days separately
or unitedly and when he returns home, he will fast for seven days
in the same manner.
PROHIBITED THINGS IN HAJ AND UMRAH
(1) During Haj and Umrah, it is prohibited to put on shirt,
trouser, sock, turban. A wearing apparel without stttch and
sandal may be used. One should not cover his head as head is
included within Ihram. A woman can wear stitched cloth but her

194
Vol-I
SECRETS OF PILGRIMAGE
face will remain uncovered. (2) He shall not use scents of any
kind. (3) He shall shave the hairs of head and not manicure nails.
(4) He shall not have sexual intercourse before the end of Ihram.
(5)
It is unlawful to kiss, embrace or to marry or get married
during Ihram. (6) It is unlawful to sacrifice game of land except
gameofsea.
r
SECTION 2
EIGHT DUTIES OF HAJ FROM FIRST TO LAST
(1 ) There are eight duties when one comes out of his house till
he makes Ihram. (a) He shall make Tauba, pay compensation to
the oppressed and clear off his debts and give expenses of
maintenance for his family members
till his retum. He shall
return the trusts entrusted to him and take Iegally earned money
sufficient for his journey expenses till his return along with the
additional sum for the poor, the destitute and the weak. He shall
spend something in charity before he starts.
(2) He shall seek a religious companion. He will seek your
good and help you. He will remind you
if you forget. Take
farewell from relatives, friends and neighbours and seek their
blessings and give your blessings to them by saying:
I am
entrusting to God your religion and your trust and the end of
your actions. The Prophet used to pray for the man who wished
to perform'Haj: May God keep you in His protection. May He
give you provision of God fear. May He forgive your sins, and
may He keep your face towards good wherever you are.
(3) Pray two rak'ats of prayer before starting from home with
Fateha and Sura Kaferun in the first rak'at and Sura Ikhlas in the
second rakat. When you finish your prayer, raise your two hands
and seek blessings with this Doa: O God, you are my friend in this
journey, you are my successor for my properties, children and
friends, save me and them from all calamities. O God, I seek from
you in this journey virtues, God fear and actions pleasing to you.
O God, make the world narrow for me, make my joumey easy
and give me provision of health of body, religion and safety of
properties and take us for pilgrimage of your House and for
visiting the grave of your Prophet Muhammad (P.H). O God, I
seek refuge to you from the troubles of joumey, from change of
conditions and from the evil looks of the family members and
friends. O God, give us and them the blessings of your neamess.
Vol-I
195
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
Don't deprive us and them of your blessing and don't change
your kindness on us and on them.
(4) When you will come near the door of your house, say: In
the name of God,
I rely on God, there is no power and might
except in God. O Lord, I seek refuge to Thee that
I my not be
misguided, that I may not misguide anybody, that I may not slip
or that
I may not cause anybody to
slip, that
I may not be
oppressed or that I may not oppress anybody, that nobody may
ascribe ignorance to me, nor I may ascribe ignorance to anybody.
I seek refuge to Thee from all these matters.
(5) When you get on board of your conveyance, say in the
name of God and with God, God is greatest trust on God, the
Great, the Mighty. There is no power and no might except in God.
Whatever God
wills comes into being. God has made
this
conveyance subservient to us. We shall have to retum to our
Lord. When you sit on the conveyance, recite seven times: All
praise is due to God who showed me path for it We would not have
found guidance if God did not show us guidance. O God Thou art
our carrier on backs and Thou art helper in all our affairs.
(6) Most of your joumey should be at night. The Prophet §aid:
You should travel at night, as the earth becomes narrow at night
and not at day. Sleep little during the night that you may be
helper in journey. When you reach a high place, say: O God, Lord
of seven heavens and that which casts shade, Lord of seven
earths and that which reduces
it, Lord of the devil and those
whom they misguide, Lord of air and on what it blows upon,
Lord of sea and what it blows upon, I seek good of the inhabitants
of this place,
I seek refuge to Thee from their evils. When you
land at any place, pray two rak'ats.
(7) You should not travel during day time. Don't walk alone
and don't go out of your company and keep a watch at the time of
your sleep at night. Spread out your hands if you sleep at the
early part of night. If you sleep by the latter part of night, place
your head on the palm of your hand. Thus the Prophet used to
sleep in his joumey in order to guard against the loss of a prayer.
The loss of a prayer is more severe than the loss of a pilgrimage.
(8) When you get on a high place on the way, recite Takbir
thrice and then recite: O God, Thy honour is above all honours,
Thine is all praise and all glory when you get down, recite Tasbih.

196
SECRETS OF PILGRIMAGE
Vol-I
DUTIES FROM MIQAT TO THE ENTRY
INTO MECCA
(1)
Take bath with the intention of making Ihram, comb
your hairs and head, manicure your nails, clip your mustache
and do everything as described in the chapter on purity and
cleanliness.
(2) Put on two pieces of unsewn Ihram
cloth.
White cloth is dearest to God. Use scent in body and cloth, (3).
Take journey if you walk on foot. Now make niyyat of either
Ifrad, Qeran or Tamattu Haj and say Talbiyah-present to Thee,
O God, present to Thee, there is no partner for Thee, all praise
and gifts are for Thee, there is no partner for Thee. (4) When
you enter into Ihram,
recite the following: O God,
I make
niyyat for pilgrimage. O God, make it easy for me, help me in
fulfilling
its duties, accept
it from me. There are other
invocations also. (5) It is commendable to recite Talbiah in a
loud voice at the time of ascending, descending, riding on
conveyance. It is as follows: O God, I am present to Thee, I am
present to Thee, There is no partner for Thee. All praise, gifts
and lordship are for Thee. Thou hast got no partner. Whenever
anything astonished the Prophet, he used to say: Labbaik, the
life of the next world is true life.
DUTIES AFTER ENTRY INTO
MECCA TILL TAWAF
(1) Takebath to enter Mecca.
(2) When you enter the
first boundury of Harem outside
Mecca, then recite: O God, this is Thy sacred sanctuary. Thy safe
place. So save my blood, my hairs and my body from Hell. Save
me from Thy chastisement on the day Thou wilt resurrect Thy
servants and include me in the company of Thy friends and those
subservient to Thee.
(3) Enter Mecca by the high place of Mecca and come out of it
by its low place.
(4) When you enter Mecca and come near the Ka'ba, recite the
following: There is no deity but God. God
is greatest. O God,
Thou art Peace, from Thee peace, and Thou abode is the abode of
peace. Blessed art Thou, O possessor of glory and honour. O God,
this is Thy house. Thou hast made is sacred and honourable. So
increase its honour, respect and awe. O God, open for me the
197
Vol-I
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
doors of Thy mercy and admit me in Thy Paradise and give me
refuge from the accursed devil.
(5) When you enter the Ka'ba, enter it through the door of
Banu Shaibah and recite: In the name of God, with God, from
God, towards God, in the way of God and upon the religion of
the Apostle of God. When you will come near the Ka'ba, recite:
O God, accept my repentance, forgive my faults, reduce my
burden. All praise is due to God who has taken me to His
sacred House, who has made it the refuge of men and their safe
place and a guide to the universe. O God, I am Thy servant.
This is Thy city, this is Thy sanctuary and this is Thy house. I
am present to Thee. I beseech. Thy mercy and I inform Thee of
the invocation of one afflicted. I seek Thy forgiveness andThy
pleasure.
(6) Then touch the Black Stone by your right hand, kiss it and
recite: O God,
I have fulfilled Thy trust and my promise. Bear
witness of my fulfillment.
FOURTH DUTY TAWAF (Circumbulation) Observe seven
rules in Tawaf:-
(1) Observe the conditions of prayer in Tawaf. In other
words be pure from all sorts of uncleanliness and cover your
private parts. Tawaf is like prayer except that conversation is
allowed therein. It shall be done with Ihram dress as prescribed.
(2) Then waitat the Black Stone which is the preliminary point o£
circling the Ka'ba. (3) Recite at the start of Tawaf: In the name of
God, God is greatest. O God, I began this circling after putting
faith in Thee, testifying
to the truth of Thy Book,
fulfilling
promise with Thee and following the ways of Thy Apostle
Muhammad (Peace be on him). After crossing the Black Stone,
recite when you reach the door of the Ka'ba: O God, this House
is Thine, this sanctuary is Thine, this safe place is Thine and this
place is the place of refuge from Hell to Thee. Thus there are
recitations at every point round the Ka'ba as prescribed and you
will go round the Ka'ba seven times.
(7) After finishing Tawaf, pray two rak'ats
at Maqame
Ibrahim following the Prophet and make invocations. The
Prophet said: He who makes Tawaf of the Ka'ba seven times and
then prays two rak'ats will get the rewards of setting free a slave.

198
SECRETS OF PILGRIMAGE
Vol-I
FIFTH DUTY-SA'YI:
(Running between Safa and Merwa)
,
A
^
ter ^shing TawaC take to running between the two
nillocks - Safa and Merwa seven times and recite the followine
before doing it: There is no deity but He. There is no partner for
Him. His is the kmgdom and His is all praise. He giveth life
and taketh life and He is eternal without death. All good is in
H!S hands and He is powerful over all things. There is no deity
but God. He is single. He has proved true. His promise, helped
His servant and honoured His army and routed the
allies.
There
is no deity but God, being sincere to Him in worship
though the polytheists dislike
it. Then at the beginnine of
running, recite: O Lord, forgive and show mercy and pardon
what Thou knowest. Thou art majestic and honourable. O God
our Lord, give us good in this world and good in the hereafter
and save us from Hell.
SIXTH DUTY-WAITING AT ARAFAT
The waiting time at Arafat is from noon of the 9th Zil-haj to
the early dawn of the lOth Zil-Haj. After reaching Mina, recite
the foIlowing: O God, this is Mina, bestow grace on me as Thou
hast bestowed grace here on Thy friend and those who were
obedient to Thee. Reaching at Arafat, fix your tent and wait
there with a great penitent mind and recite invocations and
mercy of Goci
3S mUCH 3S P°SsibIe and seek f° rg»veness and
SEVENTH DUTY OTHER INSTITUTIONS OF HAJ
^,
S,
?
n
u
riS
!
the next da^ start from Ara fat and reach
Muzdalafah and recite the foIlowing: O God, this is Muzdalafah
people of different tongues have gathered here seekine different
necessaiy thmgs from Thee. Make me one of those who have
sought from Thee and Thou hast granted them. Then pray
Magnb and Isha together with one Azan and two Aaamats. Stav
here for one mght as it is included within the institution of Hai.
Next day, start for Mina and reach the place of stone throwine
and throw seven stones there as prescribed. Then sacrifice an
animal and then shave your head. Then retum to Mecca and
make Tawaf of the Ka ba. Then retum to Mina again.
Vol-I
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
199
EIGHTH AND NINTH DUTIES UMRAH,
TAWAF OF FAREWELL
He who intends to make Umrah before or after Haj, let him
take bath, put on Ihram dress and make Ihram from its appointed
place. When you enter Mecca, go round the Ka'ba seven times
reciting the prescribed invocations and run between Safa and
Merwa. Then it ends with the shaving of head. After finishing all
rites of Haj and Umrah, make Tawaf of the Ka'ba seven times
before you start for home and seek forgiveness from God and
express gratefulness for getting opportunity of making Haj and
Umrah.
TENTH DUTY-VISIT TO MEDINAH
The Prophet said: Whose visits my grave after my death has
met me as it were during my life time. He also said: He who does
not visit me inspite of having means oppresses me. He also said:
Whose does not come to me except with the object of visiting me,
it is duty of God that I become his intercessor. He also said: He
who wishes to visit Medinah, should send much blessings upon
the Prophet on his way to Medinah. When the wall and trees of
Medinah
fall
to his eyes, he will
recite: O God,
this
is the
sanctuary of Thy Apostle. So make it a shield for saving me from
Hell and a safe place from punishment and bad account. When
you enter Medinah, recite the following: In the name of God and
upon the religion of the Apostle of God. O Lord, enter me a true
entry and take me out a true taking out and send for me from
Thee a strong helper. Then pray two rak'ats after entering the
mosque and then wait near the face of the Holy Prophet and send
profuse Darud and blessings on him as prescribed. The Prophet
said: The place between my grave and pulpit
is one of the
gardens of paradise and my pulpit is upon my fountain.
Then visit Jannatul Baqiy, the place of burials of the martyrs
and of Hazrats Osman, Hasan Jainal Abedin, Imam Baquie,
Imam Jafar Sadeq, Hazrat Fatema. Then observe prayer at the
Qubba mosque as the Prophet said: He who comes out of his
house and comes to the mosque of Qubba and says prayer there,
the rewards of an Umrah are written for him. The Prophets said:
He who can die at Medinah should do
it, as
I shall be an
intercessor for one who dies at Medinah. Then visit the grave of
the Prophet when leaving Medinah.

200
SECRETS OF PILGRIMAGE
Vol-I
SECTION 3
TEN SECRET THINGS OF HAJ
(1) The money for expense will be lawful. Hands will be free
from trades and commerce and
all thoughts will be centered
round one God and the mind will rest satisfied with the Zikr of
God and its signs. There is in Hadis: In the latter days, the people
will go for Haj but their object will be four. The rulers will go to
increase their power, the rich for trade and commerce, the poor
for begging and the leamed for name and fame. These things can
be earned but if Haj is performed with these objects, no reward is
acquired for Haj. It will go out of the Iimit of Haj, specially when
one goes as a representative for Haj. The Prophet said: God will
admit three persons in paradise for one Haj
- one who makes
death-instruction of doing Haj, one who follows this custom and
one who performs iton behalf of his brother. God gives the world
on account of religion but He does not give religion on account of
the world. The Prophet said: He who makes Jihad in the way of
God
is like the mother of Moses. She took remuneration for
suckling her son. To receive remuneration for Haj by
representation in like the receipt of remuneration of the mother
of Moses and there is no fault in
it, but it will not be legal to
perform Haj as an agent with the object of getting remuneration,
rather to accept remuneration with the object of performing Haj
is legal as the mother of Moses did.
(2) Don't help the enemies of God by keeping the
properties in tmst. Some chief of Mecca and some Sarcars of
Arabia remain busy in keeping the people away from the path of
Haj. To entruest them with properties is to heip oppression, Try
to save yourselves from their hands and if you are unable, it is
better
to return home than
to help oppressors. This
is an
innovation.
(3) Take sufficient money and provision with you so that
you may not feel difficulty for charity. Take the middle course for
expenditure. Save yourseIf from taking delicious food and drink.
There
is no misuse in excessive charity. There
is no good in
excessive expense and there
is no excessive expense in good
things. A certain wise man said
: To give provisions in the path of
Haj is considered as expense in the way of God. Hazrat Ibn Omar
said
: To have good provision in joumey is honour. He used to
Vol-I
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
201
say
: The best
is the pilgrimage in which sincere intention
is
perfect, expense is most pure and sure faith is best. The Prophet
said
: There is no reward for an accepted Haj except paradise. The
Prophet was asked
: O Apostle of God, what is an accepted Haj?
He said
: The pilgrimage in which good words are uttered and
food is given.
(4) Give up indecent actions, evil actions, quarrels and
disputes. This is the injunction of the Quran, Indecent actions
mean indecent and useless
talks including such talks with
females, talks of intercourse with them as they increase desire of
intercourse. All things which give encouragement
to do
prohibited things are also prohibited. Evil actions mean such
actions which take away from the religion of God. Quarrels and
disputes give rise to hatred and envy. Sufiyan said
: He who talks
indecent words destroys his Haj. Quarrel
is opposed to good
words and the Prophet termed good words as good deeds of Haj.
Don't inflict trouble on anybody and adopt good conduct. As
journey discloses the character and conduct of a man,
it is
therefore named Safa.
(5)
It
is better
to perform Haj by walking on
foot.
Abdullah-b-Abbas instructed his sons at the time of his death
: O
my children, perform Haj by walking on foot, as for each step of
such a pilgrim there is written 700 rewards out of the rewards of
Haram. He was questioned
: What are the rewards of Haram ? He
said
: One good deed brings one lac rewards. It is better to walk
from Mecca to Arafat and from Arafat to Mina. A perfect Haj is
one in which niyat is taken when one comes out of his house for
Ihram and to walk on foot. God says
: Make Haj and Umrah
perfect for God. Hazrats Omar, Ali and Ibn Masud explained His
verse in the above way
(6) Don't ride without keeping the balance of burden behind
and keep the things separate if possible. This gives
relief to the
camel. The Prophet made pilgrimage riding on conveyance and
even he made Tawaf riding, so that the people might follow him
in his action. The Prophet said
: Learn your institutions from me.
(7) Keep your countenance unsmooth, hairs dishevelled,
body laden with dust, indifferent to pride and attachment for the
world, as the Prophet enjoined his followers to remain
then
without beauty and with dishevelled hairs. The Prophet said
: A

202
SECRETS OF PILGRIMAGE
Vol-I
pilgrim is dressed dishevelled and his body is dust laden. God
says
: Look to the visitors of My house. They have come to Me
with hairs dishevelled and with body dust-landen from every
distant part of hills. God says
: 'Then perform the institutions of
Haj/ This means
to shave hairs,
to clip mustaches and
to
manicure nails. Hazrat Omar sent instructions to his generals
:
put on old clothes and habituate yourselves to bear hardships.
(8) Show kindness
to the riding animals and don't take
anything on them beyond
their strength. Sleeping over their
backs gives them trouble and gives a sense of hea viness to them.
The friends of God did not sleep on the backs of animals. The
Prophet said
: Don
x
t make the backs of your animals seats, and to
descent from their backs morning and evening is commendable
as it gives rest to the animals. Abu Darda'a said to his camel at the
time of his death
: O camel, don't dispute with me near your
Lord, as I did not burden you with load beyond your strength.
Once a man said to the sage Ibnul Mobarak
: I am giving this
letter of mine with you. You will take it to the destination. He
said
: I will ask the owner of the camel about it, as I took hire of
this camel. Thus he feared to carry it on account of God fear and
piety.
(9) Seek nearness of God by sacrificing an animal. Try to
sacrifice an animal which
is strong and strout.
If sacrifice
is
compulsory, don't eat its meat and if optional, you may eat its
meat. God says
: 'Whose honour the signs of God'. This
is
explained by saying to sacrifice stout and strong animal. The
ancient people did not press for price of three things-animals of
pilgrimage, setting free of slaves and animals of sacritice, as the
best of three things
is that which
is best in price and most
valuable to the seller. The object is not the increase in meatbut to
purify from the guilt of miserliness and to adorn it for God with
honour as
its flesh and blood will not reach God but He will
accept from you God fear. The Prophet was asked
: How is Haj
accepted ? He said
: By A'z and Sa'z. To proclaim Talbiah loudly
is called A'z and to sacrifice a camel is called Sa'z. The Prophet
said
: Nothing is dearer to God on the day of sacrifice out of the
actions of men than the sacrifice of an animal. It will come on the
Resurrection Day with its hoof and horns and its blood falls in a
place near God before it fa!ls on the ground. So purify your soul
by sacrifice. There is in Hadis
: There is reward for every hair of
Vol-I
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
203
the sacrificed animal and for every drop of blood and it will be
weighed near God. So give good news. The Prophet said
:
Sacrifice a good animal, as
it will be your carrier on the
Resurrection Day.
(1) To spend with a cheerful mind. Bear with Pleasure
sacrifice of the loss that is caused in the matter of properties or
the occurrence of any calamity, because
it
is a proof of the
acceptance of Haj. The troubles and calamities on the way to
pilgrimage is like expense in the way of God and the expense of a
dirham at that time
is equal to the expense of seven hundred
dirhams. That is the reward of bearing hardships in the way of
Jihad. Nothing
is spoiled near God of any trouble which
is
foreborn and every loss which is sustained. It is said that if one
gives up sins and bad company and takes up good company and
gives up assembly of useless talks and takes to the assemblies of
Zikr, they are the signs of acceptance of Haj.
SIGNIFICANCE OF INTERNAL ACTIONS OF HAJ
KNOWLEDGE: The
first
thing
of Haj
is
to know
everything in connection with Haj. Know. O dear readers, that
you will not be able to reach God
till you can control your
passions and low desires, restrain yourself from
all
enjoyments and pleasure, make short your necessities and
work only for the sake of God. For this reason, the friends of
God of yore used to live far away from the localities of men
and lived in lonely places in caves of mountains and hills, so
that their lovetfor God might be deep. God says about them in
the Quran
: Because there are hermits and those who
renounced the work among them and they are not proud.
When they began to Iive contrary to it and gave up loneliness
for divine service and mixed with the people to fulfill their low
desires, God sent the Apostle Muhammad (P. H.) to reawaken
the paths of the next world and to call them to the aways of the
Prophets. On being questioned by the religious people about
the life of a hermit, the Prophet said
: God gave us in lieu
thereof Jihad and Takbir in every elevated place (Haj). The
Prophet said
: God gave this gift for this people and made Haj
as their monkery, honoured the ancient House as His House
fixed
it as the object of desire of the people, made
its
surrounding place pure to show honour to the House, made
Arafat an opening space as the precincts of His House and

204
SECRETS OF PILGRIMAGE
VoI-I
honoured the place by prohibiting hunting and cutting off trees
therein. He madeitas the Darbarof the greatest Emperor. Every
visitor comes to the Darbar from every distantand inaccessible
place dishevelled in hairs and laden with dust and in the most
humble spirit. He knows that no house can encompass God
and no town can cover him and yet he does
it to make his
divine service and his allegiance and obedience perfect. For
this reason, throwing of stones at Mina, running between Safa
and Merwa and other institutions do not come within
understading or seem good. But by these acts, full servitude is
expressed, The object of the payment of Zakat is understood.
The object of fasting to restrain sexual passion and low desires
is understood. The object of prayer is also understood. But no
satistactory reason
is ostensibly found
in
the throwing of
stones, running between Safa and Merwa, nor they come
within understanding. It is however true that true servitude is
a separate thing and
to serve God means
that one should
conduct himself according
to the order of God, whether
it
contains any meaning or not. The object of obeying orders is
nothing but to serve God. It is an act of wisdom to obey God in
places where intellect cannot enter and which
it cannot
comprehend. Servitude to God
is expressed fully when you
understand a thing or not. For this reason, The Prophet said
regarding Haj
: I consider Haj thus a veritable truth, servitude
in reality and slavery of the highest order. He did not say this
with regard
to prayer and other divine services. So the
institutions whkh cannot be understood by intellect are the
perfect divine services for making the heart pure, because to
act contrary to nature and to return from habits
is the real
servitudeand slavery.
DESIRE FOR HAJ: The Ka'ba
is the House of God. The
meaning of coming to it is to see God there. He who desires to
visit the Ka'ba in the world should have his object nat to be
deprived of it. His object should be his look to the countenance of
God in His permanent abode. This earthly eye has got no power
to have a glimpse of the Divine light, nor can it bear the brilliance
of His light. The light of eye in the next world will be permanent
and will be free from the causes of destruction and change and
then it will be of for glimpse of the Lord. But one can be fit to eam
it by not visiting His House. So desire to meet Him will lead you
to the causes of visit without doubt
Vol-I
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
205
FIRM DETERMINATION OF MAKING HAJ
Know, O dear readers, that you will intend to be separate
from your home and family by
the help of your firm
determination and turn your face towards visiting the House
after giving up comforts and pleasures of home life. Know in
your mind the honour of the Ka'ba and the exalted rank of its
Owner. Make your firm determination only for God, keep distant
from name and fame and make your intention sincere and pure.
TO CUT OFF TIE IN HAJ: It means to pay compensation to
the oppressed and to make sincere repentance to God from all
sins. Every oppression has got a compensation and every
compensation is due to somebody. Don't hope to return home
and make wasiat to your children in writing and think of this
journey as the joumey for the next world.
PROVISIONS OF JOURNEY: Seek provision from your
lawful earnings and think that your good deeds are the
provisions of your next world and these will go with you after
your death. Regarding conveyance. Be grateful to God that you
have got a conveyance
to carry you and your loads. Remember
that you are visiting a funeral prayer in the journey towards the
next world. The affairs of Haj are like journey to the next world.
Ihram cloth When you put it on. remember the coffin cloth with
which you will be clothed. As you wear tow unsewn pieces of
cloth to go near the House of God and change your habit of
putting on fine clothes, so you will not be able to meet with God
after your death unless you take clothes contrary to the clothes of
this world. As there is no stitching of cotton cloth for burial, so
there is no stitching of Ihram cloth.
STARTING FROM HOME: When you come out of your
home, know that you are going on a journey to God
after
separating your family and friends. Think then in your mind
what is your object, to whom are you going, to meet whom do
you hope ? You are going to meet the greatest emperor and for
that you have surrendered and you have responded to it. Bring
this consolation in mind that if you visit the Ka'ba you may get
glimpse of its Owner. This is your last object and it will help you
towards that object. Hope in mind to reach the Ka'ba and that
your Haj may be accepted, Don't depend on your good deeds and
believe firmly in the mercy of God. If you cannot reach the Ka'ba

206
SECRETS OF PILGRIMAGE
Vol-I
and die on the wayx it will help to meet Him being His guest as
God says
: If a man goes out of his house and makes emigration to
God and His Apostle and then death overtakes him, his reward is
upon God 4:100Q. When you reach the Miqat or the fixed place
for Ihram, remember all the great events when you will leave the
world up to the Resurrcetion
Day. When you remember the
danger of crossing the way, remember then the questions of
Munkar and Naqir. If you see the ferocious beasts on the way
remember the biting of snakes in graves.
TALBIAH ATMIQAT: Know that Talbiah means to respond
to the call of God. Remember Him between hope and fear and
depend on the mercy of God. Imam Sufiyan Saori said that Imam
Jainal Abedin son of Hazrat Hussain made pilgrimage. When he
made Ihram, his face became changed and he had no strength to
say Labbaik. He was asked
: Why are you not uttering Labbaik ?
He sa,d
:
I fear lest I may be said
: You have no Labbaik and
fortune, When he uttered Labbaik, he suddenly fell in swoon and
remained long m that condition. As a result, he could not wait at
Arafat. Abu Solaiman Darani did not utter Labbaik even after
walking a mile. Then he fell down senseles. When he recoverd
from his swoon, he said
: O Ahmad, woe to you, i fear lest I may
be said
: There is no Labbaik and fortune for you. Remember at
the time when you utter Labbaik the condition of the people on
the day of congregation.
ENTRY INTO MECCA: Remember at the time when you
enter Mecca that you have reached safely in the sacred place of
G°d and hope from God that you will be safe from punishment
on account of your entry into Mecca. When you look at the Ka'ba
remember its glory and hope to meet its Owner. Tawaf of Ka'ba 's
like prayer. Remember then that your Tawaf is like the Tawaf of
the near angles who are making round the Throne. Don't think
that the object of your Tawaf is the Tawaf of your body round the
House but
its object
is the Tawaf of your mind with the
rememberance of God. Know that an honourable Tawaf is the
Tawafof mmd before God. The Ka'ba is the outward darbar of a
kmg. He who is not seen by external eye appears there. Soul is a
thmg of the spiritual world as body is of the material world God
is in the unseen world. This visible world leads to the world
unseen. This is for those for whom God opened this door. Think
that the Ka'ba
is the exact prototype of the Baitul Mamur in
Vol-I
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
207
heaven. The angles make Tawaf of Baitul Mamur and the people
of theKa'ba.
KISSING: When you kiss the Black Stone, think that it is a
sign of allegiance and kiss His hand. Be firm in your will that you
are fulfilling your promise. The Prophet said
: The Black stone is
the right hand of God in the World. As a man handshakes with
his brother, so God also handshakes with the people by means of
the Black Stone.
SAYI BETWEEN SAFA AND MERWA: Sayi between these
two hillocks in expectation of getting His glimpse is just as a mna
goes /orward and backward in getting a glimpse of his emperor.
Think that Safa
is the scale of good deeds and Merwa of bad
deeds. By running between these two hillocks, think which of the
scales becomes heavy. The wait in Arafat After seeing the vast
concourse of people of different climes and tongues, you will
remember the case of the great congregation on the Resurrection
or not. When you will remember this, keep your mind engaged in
the rememberance of God. Throwing of stones. Obey God's
command by throwing stones and show sincerely and honestly
your servitude to God even though
it does not come to your
understanding, because blind obedience of a slave to his master
gains the love of the master. Then intend to follow the deeds of
Abraham who drove away the devil by throwing stones at him
when the latter wanted to misguide him and not to sacrifice his
dearest son Ismail in obedience to God's command. The meaning
of Haj
is
to obey God's commands without argument and
without exercising intellect.
^
SACRIFICE OF ANIMAL: Sacrifice in a mass scale brings
the people near God. For this reason, the animal for sacrifice
should be stout and strong. Hope that in lieu of every limb of the
sacrificed animal, God will save your every limb from Hell-fire.
The more it is stout and strong, the more you will be free from
Hell-fire.
VISITING MEDINAH: When your sight will fall on the wall
of the city of Medinah, remember that God selected this city for
His Prophet and took him there. This
is the place of the
Day that each people will gather there with their respective
Prophet and each people will except intercession of their Prophet
and remain busy to know whether his intercesion was accepted

208
SECRETS OF PILGRIMAGE
Vol-I
promulgation of God's compulsory ordinanace and the ways of
the Prophet. He fought with the enemies here and preached
Islam up to his death. God established the religion through the
successors of the Prophet. Then think of the foot-steps of the
Prophet in the city and take steps with care and honour. The
Prophet said: God will present before me many people. They will
say: O Muhammad, O Muhammad. I will say: O Lord, they are
my companions. He will say: You don't know what evil deeds
they have done after you? I will say: Then be off from me." If you
have not followed the Prophet, you will be far away from him;
still you will hope for the mercy of God. When you will reach the
mosque, remember that God selected the place for the Prophet
and the earliest Muslims. Enter it in fear and hope. When Wais
Qarni entered the mosque of Medina and began to wait at the
door, he said: This is the grave of the Holy Prophet. At once he
feH in swoon. When he regained his senses, he said: Take me out
of this - 1 have got no taste in the place where the Prophet has been
buried.
MEETING WITH THE PROPHET: Meet with him as if he is
ahve and thatyou are standing before him. Don'tgo very near his
grave as you would not have gone to him if he were alive. Don't
touch his grave and don't kiss it and know that God knows your
mind, your standing and your salutation. The Prophet said: God
appointed an angel in his gra ve. Whose sends salam to him out of
his followers he will take it to him. This has been said with regard
to that person who will not be present before his grave. How will
it be in case of that man who
left his home and family and
relatives and journeyed in difficult places and hills and came to
visit the Prophet? The Prophet said: If a man sends one Darud on
me, God will send ten Daruds on him. Then come to the pulpit of
the Apostle of God and think of his standing thereon and his
sermons to his followers. When it will be finished, think whether
your Haj has been accepted or not as He does not accept Haj of
one whom He does not love.
CHAPTER VIII
RECITATION OF THE QURAN
All praise
is due to God who showered blessings on His
servants by sending revealed books and Prophets. This Quran
does not contain any
false stories of yore or future.
It
is a
revelation from the Most High, the Almighty. Therein there is
food for reAection for those who are thoughful and there is true
stories of former nations. By
its help, walk on straight path
becomes easy as the commands and prohibitions were expressed
there in clear terms and the lawful and unlawful things made
clear. It is a light and therein there is cure of the diseases of mind.
God destroyed those who opposed
it. God misguides one who
seeks knowledge other than that of the Quran. It is a firm rope of
God, clear light and firmest tie. There is everything in
it, small
and great. There is no end of its miracle. It is ever fresh and new
to the reciters. It is a guide for the past and future. The Jinn heard
it and wamed their classes. They said: We heard a wonderful
Quran. It is a guide. We believe in it and did not set up anything
with our Lord. Those who advised according to
it told truth.
Those who held it firm, found guidance. Those who acted up to it
got salvation. God says:
I have revealed
it and
I will certainly
preserve it. The modes of preserving the Quran are the following
committing it to memory, writting it in papers, to recite it always,
to read it in prayer, to explain it and comment on
it. It will be
discussed in four sections.
SECTION
EXCELLENCE OF THE QURAN
The Prophet said: If a man thinks that what has been gi ven to
others is better than it considered little the dearest thing of G^d.
He said: Prophets, angels, or anybody else cannot be better
intercessors in rank than the Quran. He said: If the Quran is kept
within skin, burning fire will not go near
t, nor touch
it. The
Prophet said: Recitation of the Quran is the best di vine service of
my followers. He said: God recited chapter Toaha and Easin one
thousand years before creation. When the angels heard them,
they said: How fortunate are they on whom they will be revealed.
How fortunate are those who commit them to memory. How
I

210
RECITATION OF THE QURAN
Vol-I
forhinate are the tongues which broadcast them. The Prophet
said: The best of you is he who leams the Quran and teaches it.
He said: God says: If a man cannot pray or invoke Me on account
of his being engaged in reciting the Quran, I will give him better
rewards than those who express gratefulness. He said: Two
persons will stand in the mountain of musk on the Resurrection
Day. They will have no fear and will render ho accounts, even
they will be free from the wants of men - (1) He who recites the
Quran for pleasure of God, (2) He who becomes the leader of a
people who remain satished with him. The Prophet said: A
reciter of the Quran belongs to the family of God and
is His
sincere servant. He said: Rust falls on heart as it falls on iron. The
Prophet was asked: O Messenger of God, how can the rust be
removed? He said: By reciting the Quran and by remembering
death. The Prophet said: God hears the recitation of the Quran
more attentively than themasterof a singing girl.
Wise saying: Hazrat Abu Omarah Baheli said: Recite the
Quran. This hanging book will not deceive you. God will not
punish one who commits it to memory. Hazrat Ibn Masud said:
When you wish to acquire knowledge select the Quran as it is the
embodiment of the knowledge of the previous and future
generations. He said quoting the saying of the Prophet: You will
get ten rewards in Iieu of each word of it. Beware, I am not saying
that 'Alef, Lam and Mim' is a word but Alef is a word, Lam is a
word and Mim is a word. He said: Let nobody among you ask
anything about himself except the Quran. If he loves the Quran
and remains satisfied with it, he loves God and His Prophet and if
he disrespects the Quran, he disrespects God and His Prophet.
Hazfat Amr-b-A
rs said: Every verse of the Quran is a door of
Paradise and a light in your house. He said: He who recites the
Quran opens as it were the door of Prophethood by his two sides,
but no revelation will come to him. Hazrat Abu Hurairah said:
The provision of the inmates of a house in which the Quran is
recited increases,
their good becomes more, angels remain
present fhere and the devil goes out of it. The provision of the
inmates of a house in which the Quran is not recited becomes
straitened, their welfare diminishes, angels go out of it and the
devil comes
in. Imam Ahmad-b-Hamba!
said:
I saw God
in
dream and asked him: O God, for what thing one can come near
to Thee! He said: O Ahmad, by means of My Kalam the Quran. I
asked Him: O Lord, by means of its understanding
>r not? He
Vol-I
THE BOOK WORSHIP
211
said: Ves, whether you understand
its meaning or not.
Fazil-b-Yeaz said: One who commits the Quran by heart is the
bearer of the standard of Islam. He should not hold useless talks
with those who hold such talks. He should not forget the Quran
as others do. Imam Sufiyan Saori said: When a man recites the
Quran, an ange! kisses on his forehead. Amr-b-Maimum said: If a
man reads one hundred verses of the Quran after morning
prayer, God
will give him rewards of the actions of the
inhabitants of the world. Once KhaIid-b-Oqbah came
to
the
Prophet and said: Read out to me the Quran. He read out to him:
God enjoins you to do justice and good. He said to the Prophet:
Recite again. He read it again and then said: By God, therein there
is sweetness, heightness,
its lower portion has got bases,
its
upper has got fruits and
it is not the words of a man. Hazrat
Hasan Basri said: By God, there is no greater wealth than the
Quran and there is no want after the Quran. Fuzail said: If a man
recites the last portion of chapter Hashr and dies on that day, the
seal of martyrdom
is imprinted on him.
If he reads
it in the
evening and dies in
that night, the seal of martyrdom
is
imprinted on him. Hazrat Ali said: Three things increase the
power of memory and removes scum, tooth-
stick,
fast and
recitation of the Quran.
PUNISHMENT FOR HEEDLESS RECITATION
Hazrat Anas said: There are some men who recite the Quran,
but
them. Abu Solaiman Darani said: The angels of Hell
will arrest those who commit the Quran to memory but become
disobedient to God. Hazrat Ibn Masud said: Those who
committed the Quran to memory should getacquainted with the
night when the people remain asleep and should be sorry when
the people commit sins and make enjoyments during day time.
They will weep when the people will laugh, they will remain
silent when the people will hold useless talks. The Prophet said:
Recite the Quran till it prohibits you to do evil deeds. If it does not
prohibit you,
it will not be considered as your recitation. The
Prophet said: He who knows the unlawful things of the Quran as
lawful does notbelieve in theQuran. Hazratlbn Masud said: The
Quran was revealed to you for doing actions. So translate your
recitation into action. There are men among you who recite the
Quran from first to last and do not omit a single word therefrom
but they donot translate it into action. There is in the Torah: God

212
RECITATION OF THE QURAN
Vol-I
said: O My servantr are you not ashamed of Me? If a Ietter from
your friend comes to you in your journey, you at once come toa
side of the road and read with an attentive mind every word and
sentence of it and you do not omit anything from it. but I sent My
Book to you and I am seeing with what attentive mind you are
reading
it and how you have fo!lowed
its commands and
prohibitions. But you have turned your face from
it. O My
servant, have you considered it more mean than your friend's
letter? I am present to you. I am speaking with you but you have
tumed your mind from Me. Have I become more mean to you
thanyourfriend?
J
SECTION 2
EXTERNAL RULES OF RECITING THE QURAN
There are ten external rules for the recitation of the Quran.
(1) After ablution, face the Ka'ba without showing pride in
sitting with head downwards just like the sitting of a student
before his teacher. The best way of Quran reading is in prayer
standing in a mosque. God says: They remember God standing,
sitting and lying on their sides and ponder over the creations of
the heaven and earth. In this verse, every condition has been said
m order of excellence-first standing, then sitting and then lying
state. Hazrat Ali said: If a man recites a portion of the Quran in
prayer standing, one hundred rewards are written for him for
every word.
If a man recites a portion of the Quran sitting in
prayer, fifty rewards are written for him for every word. If a man
reads the Quran outside the prayer with ablution, twenty five
rewards are written for him for every word. If a man reads the
Quran without ablution, ten rewards are written for him for
every word. Hazrat Abu Zarr Geffari
said: To make much
prostrationatday timeand to pray longatnightarebetter.
(2) THE QUANTITY OF QURAN RECITING: There are
different rules
for the readers about the quantity of the
recitations of the Quran. Some finish the whole Quran in a day
and a night, some twice, some thrice and some once in a month.
The best way is what the Prophet said in this Hadis: He who
finishes the Quran within less time than three days cannot gain
the knowledge of the rules of religion as hasty reading cannot
clearly be recited. Hazrat Ayesha said of a man who recited the
Vol-I
THE BOOK WORSHIP
213
Quran hastily: This man neither recites the Quran, nor remains
silent. The Prophet ordered Abdullah-b-Amr to finish the Quran
once a week. Some of the companions followed this rule. They
were Hzrats Osman, Zaid- b-Sabet, Ibn Masud, Obai-b-Ka'ab and
others. So there are several modes of finishing the Quran, (1) once
in a day and a night, (2) once in a month, (3) once in a week with
seven equal portions a day.
The Quran was first free from I'rab or dots above and below.
Hazrat Hasan Basari said: There is no harm in giving I'rab to the
Quran. It is commendable to read the Quran slowly. The object of
the Quran reading is to ponder and there are fixed places therein
for slow-reading. The Prophet explained every word and every
sentence separately. Hazrat Ibn Abbas said:
I prefer
to read
chapter Baqr and chapter Imran slowly and
to ponder about
them than to read them hurriedly.
Weeping at the time of recitation of the Quran
is also
commendable, as the Prophet said: Recite the Quran and weep. If
y°u cannot weep, assume weeping attitude. The Prophet said:
He who does not read the Quran with sweet tone is not of us.
Saleh Marbi
said:
I recited the Quran in dream before the
Prophet. He said: O Saleh, where is your weeping in reciting the
Quran? Hazrat Ibn Abbas said: When you read the vefse of
prostration, don't prostrate soon till you weep. If the eyes of any
one ofyou do not shed bears, let him weep by his heart. The mode
of weeping by force is to bring sorrows to the mind. He who can
bring sorrows to the mind can also bring weeping. The Prophet
said: The Quran has been revealed for sorrow. When you read it,
be in a sorrowful mode. The mode of bringing sorrow
is to
ponder over the words of warnings and punishments in the
Quran. Fulfil your duty to every verse. If you read the verse of
prostration, prostrate. If you hear the verse from another, make
prostration but do
it not without ablution. There are fourteen
prostrations in the Quran. Prostration is perfect when Takbir is
recited therein. God says: Fall down in prostration and glorify
the praise of your Lord. There are conditions of prostration like
the conditions of prayer to cover private parts, to face the Ka'ba,
to have the body and cloth pure. Recite Takbir for prostration,
then fall in prostration, then raise up your head with Takbir and
then return salam. A follower
will follow the leader in
prostration without reciting the Quran.

214
RECITATION OF THE QURAN
Vol-I
When you begin to recite the Quran, recite: I seek retuge to
God from the accursed
devil. Then recite chapter Nas and
Fateha. When you finish the Quran, say: O God, show mercy
°n me for the Quran, make it for me a guide, a light, a leader
and a mercy. O God, remind me what
I have forgotten
therefrom, teach me what I do not know therefrom, and give
me provision of reading it day and night and make it a proof
for me. O Lord of thc univcrsc.
TO RECITE THE QURAN WITH SOUND: Recite the Quran
with such sound as you may hear it. The meaning of reciting is
that you will hear yourself what is recited. Read
it with such
sound in prayer as you yourself may hear it. If you do not hear it,
your prayer will notbe valid. The Prophet said: As secret charity
brings more reward than open charity, so secret Quran-reading
brings more reward than open Quran reading with sound. In
another narration: Reading the Quran with sound is like open
charity and silent Quran reading is like secret charity. There is in
Hadis that the reward of a secret d€?ed is seventy times more than
that of an open deed. The Prophet said: What gives consolation is
a good provision and secret Zikr is the best Zikr.
There is in Hadis: don't recite the Quran With Ioud voice in
between sun-set and night prayers. The Prophet heard one party
of his companions reciting the Quran with Ioud voice in night
prayer and considered
it right. The Prophet said: If any of you
stands to pray Isha (night prayer), let him read his Quran openly,
as the angels and the inmates of the house hear Quran reading
and pray for him in lieu of his prayer. The Prophet saw his three
companions in different conditions. When passing by Abu Bakr,
he heard him reading silently and asked him about it. He said: He
with whom
I speak hears it. While passing by Hazrat Omar, he
heard him reciting the Quran with loud voice. He asked him
about
it and he said:
I am waking up the heedless and the
sleeping men and driving the devil. The Prophet passed by Bilal
and found him reading some verses
silently and some with
sound. On being asked, he said:
I am mixing good verses with
good verses. The Prophet said: Each one of you has done well. In
other words, he who fears show should read
it silently. Open
reading awakens the mind and centres the thoughts to one thing.
It is better to recite the Quran by seeing it as to look to the Quran
is also worship.
Vol-I
THE BOOK WORSHIP
215
To read the Quran with sweet voice and slowly is sunnat. The
Prophet said: God did not order sweet voice for anything except
for the Quran. He said: He who does not read the Quran with
sweet voice
is not of us.
It
is narrated that the Prophet was
waiting one night for Ayesha as she was late in coming. The
Prophet asked her: Who prevented you from coming? She said:O
Prophet of God,
I was hearing the Quran-reading of a man.
I
never heard such a sweet voice. The Prophet came to him and
heard his recitation for a long time and said: The name of this
man is Salem, the slave of Abu Hurairah. All praise is due to God
who created such a man among my followers. One night, the
Prophet heard the Quran- reading of Hazrat Ibn Masud with
Hazrat Abu Bakr and Omar and there they remained for lon£
time. Then the Prophet said: If anybody wishes the Quran to be
read
with
sweet
voice and
slowly,
let him
hear
the
Quran-reading of Ibn Omme Abd.
The Prophet said to Ibn Masud: Read out the Quran to me.
He said: O Prophet of God, I am reading it has been revealed to
you. The Prophet said:
I wish to hear it from you. When he was
reading the Quran before him, the eyes of the Prophet began to
shed tears. The Prophet said after hearing the Quran reading of
Abu Musa; This voice has been given to him from the sweet voice
of David. Hazrat Abu Musa said on hearing it: O Prophet of God,
if I had known that you would hear it, I would have read with
sweeter voice. When the companions of the Prophet gathered
together, they told one another to recite the Quran. Hazrat Omar
once asked Abu Musa: Remember our Lord. He began to read the
Quran before him. When the prayer time came, Hazrat Omar was
reminded of the prayer to which he said: Are we not in the midst
of prayer? There is hint in this verse of God: God's rememberance
is greatest. The Prophet said: If a man hears a verse of God's
Book, there will be a light for him on the Resurrection Day. There
is in Hadis that ten rewards are written for him.
SECTION 3
INTERNAL RULES OF THE QURAN-READIN
There are ten internation rules of reciting the Quran. (1) To
realise the superiority and excellence of the Quran. God's word is
self-existent attribute and mixed with His being and He
expressed that attribute in human forms and words to mankind.

216
RECITATION OF THE QURAN
VoI-I
When the people become unable to appreciate the attribute of
God they are able to understand it through
the mean of this own
attributes. If the glory and excellence of the words of God could
n°t have been made understandable in the garb of words, the
heayen and earth could not stand
to hear His words and
all
things between them would have been smashed to pieces. If God
had not made Moses patient and steady, he could not have
remained without falling into swoon after hearing His words as
the mountain has no power to remain steady being attacked with
His Brilliance. For this reason, a friend of God said
: Every word
of God kept m the Guarded Tablet is higher than the mountain
Kat. if all the angels try to made a word short, they are unable to
do it till the guard of the Guarded Tablet lifts it up and makes it
short by order of God. This is not because of the strength of its
words but the Glorious God made it fit for human use dressed
with words. A wise man said
: We saw in case of human beings
that when they wish to make their domestic animal understand
something, they mix some of their words with some unexpressed
words of the animal and create some language
to guide
its
nature.
It can under-stand
it by instinct and act accordingly
Similar
is the case with men. Though they are unable
to
understand the perfectness, dignity, beauty and solemnity of
God s words, the Prophet made them understand
in such a
manner as man conducts his animal by a strange language. The
thoughts of the Quran were stated with such words that men can
understand the wisdom of the Quran, as a lower animal can
understand the thought of men by their hints and voices The root
meaning of wisdom lies concealed in these words and voices but
still
it
is honoured on account of
its meaning Words are the
bodies of wisdom and their meaning is the soul of wisdom and
voiceis their Iife.
As human body is honoured for its internal soul, so the word
of wisdom is honoured for its voice The word of God revealed
as got high rank. It is just,judge and dear witness It orders and
prohibits There is no such strength of a void thing As shade is
unab e to stand before the brilliant rays of the sun, so a man is
unable to stand before the words of wisdom of the Quran. As eye
sight is unable to stand before the scorching rays of the sun. so a
man has got no power to enter into the deepest recess of wisdom.
He takes so much rays of the sun as he can see and know his
necessary things In short, the word of Cod
is like an unseen
Vol-I
THEBOOK WORSHIP
217
emperor in the deepest cover whose face is not visible but yet
whose order is prevalent The word of God is like the sun of which
the rays are open but its constitution is secret like radiant star By
its help the paths of journey are seen. The word of God or the
Quran is an invaluable treasure or an ever lasting drink of life
which prevents death or it is such a medicine for a disease which
lea ves no ailment if it is taken.
(2) Honour the Quran containing divine word At the time of
reciting the Quran, realise in a beautiful manner divine glory and
think that what you recite is is not human words. God says
: None
shall touch it except the pure ones. As the external papers are
preserved from touch of impure hands, so its secret meaning and
wisdom are shut up from the internal mind if it is not free form
all impurities and not illuminated by the light of honour and
gravity. As the pages of the Quran cannot be touched by every
body, so every tongue can not utter the words of the Quran and
every heart cannot grasp its meaning. When Hazrat Akramah
son of Abu Jahl opened the Quran, he fainted and said
: This is the
word of my Lord, To honour His word is to honour Him and He
is not honoured
till His attributed and the mysteries of His
creation are not pondered over,
till he knows that He
is the
Creator of all things in Heaven and earth, and that He gives them
Provision.
(3) To recites the Quran attentively after giving up one's own
ideas. God says
: O Ihya, hold fast by God's Book. It means that he
should follow the Book with industry and perseverance He who
remains busy in an enjoyment does not think of any other thing.
(4) To think about the Quran. Thinking comes after attention.
For this reason it should be read slowly as slow reading makes
thinking possible. Hazrat Ali said: There is no good in the divine
service in which there is no knowledge of religion. It has been
said
that once the Prophet read
'In the name of the Most
Compassionate, the Most Merciful' twenty times thinking about
its meaning. Hazrat Abu Zarr said
: The Prophet prayed with us
one night. He recited the same verse again and again. That is this
If Thou punisheth them, they are merely Thy servants and
if
Thou
forgiveth
them, Thou
art
Forgiving,
Merciful.
Sayeed-b-Jubair once read
the following verse repeatedly
standing
in prayer
: O the guilty, be separate to-day. Abu
Solaiman Darani said
:
I stood in prayer in four or five night

218
RECITATION OF THE QURAN
VoI-I
reciting only one verse. A certain sage of yore passed six months
by recitmg only the chapter Hud.
(5) To understand
the Quran. Realise true and correct
meaning of every verse. Therein there are the descriptions of
God s attributes, His wonderful
creations, the stories of
Prophets, the fate of the liars and how they were destroyed and
the descnptions of Parodise and Hell.
GOD'S ATTRIBUTES: God says: There
is nothing
to be
compared to Him. He is seeing, hearing. He says that He is pure,
Almighty, Cuardian, Merciful, Compassinate, and Glorious.
rhink of the meaning and significance of these names, Behind
them
there are inner meaning, and none but the God gifted
people can understand them. HinHng at this Hazrat Ali said
: The
Prophet did not inform me of any secret thing which was not
disclosed
to men. The real thing
is that God has given some
people
to understand them and
they remain desirous of
understmg them. Hazrat Ibn Masud said
: He who desires
to
acquire the knowledge of the previous and future peoples,
should seek it in the Quran.
P
F
HIS ACTIONS: God says
: He created the heaven and earth
and other thmgs. One who recites theQuran should Iearn from it
His attributes and His glory. He who can recognise real truth sees
it in everything as all things come from Him and return to Him
and everything is founded on truth for Him and for His help He
who does not see it in every visible thing cannot recognise Him.
He who can know Him knows that everything besides Him is
void and everything except He with be meeting will destruction.
If he sees his being due to the existence of God, he will see that he
has come from God and with His power. If he walks in the path of
semtude, he wil
exist and
if he walks freely he will not exist.
This is the root of spiritual insight. He should therefore ponder
over these verses
: Don't you look at what you saw? Don't you
L
0?*.*! n
!.y°U t
,
hr
°,W Semen ? Don'' y°u Iook at the water you
drmk
Don
t you look at the fire you enkindle ? So think in these
hnes at the water, fire crops and semen. Ponder over the elements
with which a man is created. It is only a drop of semen. Look at its
different compositions-bones,
flesh, veins, head, hands,
feet
Iiverr heart etc. Then all honourable attributes have been placed
in it-power of hearing, power of seeing, wisdom, power of smell.
Then it has been given attributes like anger, sexual passion, pride
Vol-I
I HE BOOK WORSHIP
219
etc. God says: Does man not consider that
I have created him
from a drop of semen ahd he is then an open adversary ?
CONDITION OF THE PROPHETS: Think how the Prophets
were given wonderful qualiHes for which they were oppressed.
Some of them were murdered and attributed falsehood. Think of
the condition of the liars like the A'd, Samud, etc. Think how the
rejecters of truth were punished and take advice from their fate.
There is no such new or old think which is not in the Quran. God
says
: If the sea were ink to describe the attributes of my Lord,it
would become dry before it described the attributes of my Lord.
For this reason, Hazrat Ali said
: If I wish, 1 can load seventy
camels with Tafsir of the chapter Fateha. The substance of what
has been said is that care should be taken to understand and
interpret the Quran.
(6) To be
free from the impediments of understanding.
Majority of the people do not understand the meaning of the
Quran. The reason is that the devil closed the door of their hearts
for which they are deprived of the secret meanings of the Quran.
• The Prophet said
: If the devil would not have roamed over the
harts of men, they could have seen the mysteries of the unseen
’ world. The real meaning of the Quran appertains to the unseen
world. The thing which is outside the grasp of the five senses and
cannot be grasped except by the light of sharp insight appertains
to the unseen world. Similar is the case with the meaning of the
Quran.
FOUR IMPEDIMENTS OF UNDERSTANDING
THE QURAN
(1) To remain busy in extracting words from the root of
words The devil works in this matter. He keeps attached with
every Quran reader to keep him away from understanding its
meaning. He recites the words repeatedly and yet he understand
that he has not pronounced it correctly and rightly. In this way,
all his thoughts are centered round the pronunciaHon of words.
How can
the meaning of the Quran come to him in these
circumstances ?
(2) The believe the sects blindly. The Quran-reader praises
the mazhabs or sects and follows the opinions he heard from
others. He believes them without ascertaining the truth or
otherwise of the opinion of the sects and follow them blindly. He

220
RECITATION OF THE QURAN
Vol-I
oPs~.SiT^r “ Ht ”*“*•
.. ,*
sr£-S
,:'^i
-‘m.i ..;
“"ss ““ '• «».
reason, the Prophet said
: When my tollowers will consideuheir
WtT
fi|
S ®re
o!'
‘ear of *s 'am W'H disappear from their hearts
Z
n *Z:lr 7 T’?.
ingin8 g-dand forbidding
he
e
a
v
exp
y
iaTnedi,hP"
° f
‘he b 'eSSin8s of reveiation.FuzaH
understanding thenSg ^f the
sns.s.t’;:,
"r““' ™"
c"
(4) To accept open meaning and to believe that thpr^
«
mner meaning except external meaning of the Quran Sazrat thn
Abbas, Muzahed and other companions said
thaV?n
b
ssS^^ss^ss
speciantv tn'I?
Sped
?!
it
?
every verse' in other words to give
prohibitkms oHheOuran thSMhus^ T°h“
hearcommands and
you hear any warning, consider that it has come abouf vou When
you hear the stories of the Prophets and c,rlyp7Zs7LkliZ
take lessTs
6
from‘H and to
w™af!s nec
'
"5 3Sked
There is sureiy some benefit for the Prophet and'iorhis JloweTs
VoI-I
THE BOOK WORSHIP
221
in the subject matter of the Quran. For this reason, God says
:
'I
settle your mind therewith/ So the people should think that by
describing the stories of the Prophets, God settled the mind of the
Prophetr gave him patience to bear troubles and hardships, made
him firm in religion so that God's victory can be seen by him.
How will you not be able to do
it when the Quran was not
revealed only for the Prophet alone but it is a medicine for all
diseases, guide for
all, blessing for all light for the whole
universe. So God has directed all men to get blessing by the help
of the Quran God says
: Remember the blessing of God on you all
and what has been revealed to you all from the Book and wisdom
with which you admonish them. God says
: I have revealed upon
you
all such a Quran in which there are descriptions of yore.
Don
rtyou then mind it?
God says
: I have revealed the Reminder to you that you may
explain to the people what has been revealed upon them. God
says
: Follow the best out of what has been revealed to you from
your Lord. This is a guide for the people, a guide and a bless for
those who believe firmly. God says
: The Quran is explainer to the
people, a guide for its followers and an admonisher. In these
verses, all people have been addressed and not a particular man.
The readers of the Quran are also among them. For this reason,
their object will be as God says
: This Quran has been revealed on
me that I may warn you there with and those to whom it reaches.
Mohammad-b-Ka'ab said
: He who reads the Quran speaks with
God as
it were. A certain learned man said
: This Quran is an
embodiment of some letters which have come to us with His
promise, so that we may understand them in prayer, so that we
may ponder over them in loneliness and admit them in our
religious affairs and sunnat which
is followed. Malek-b-Dinar
said
: The Quran is the fountain of a believer just as rain is the
fountain of earth. God says
i It is a cure and a blessing for the
believer and it increase nothing but loss to the oppressors.
(8) Mind influencedbyreading
As there are different verses, so different thoughts should fall
in your mind. You should have change of condition and thoughts
according to the meaning of each verse. So in your mind there
should be feelings of sorrows, fear, hope etc. You should find
forgiveness and blessings attached with some verses and a wise
man tries to get it as God says
:
I am forgiving to one who
is

222
Vol-I
RECITATION OF THE QURAN
repentant, has got faith and does good deeds and who finds
guidance. This forgiveness
is based on four conditions-
repentance, faith, good deeds and guidance. God says
: Man is
surely in loss except those who have got taith, do good deeds,
advice one another with truth and for patience. He mentioned
four conditions even in this verse. God says
: God's blessing is
near those who do good to the people. Sufiyan Saori said
: By
God, if a man reads the Quran in the morning and brings faith in
it,
his sorrows
increase, his happiness decreases,
his actions
mcrease and his comforts decrease. The Prophet said once to Ibn
Masud
: Recite the Quran to men. He said
: I began to read the
chapter 'Women'. When
I reached this verse
: How will
it be
when I shall bring every people with a witness and bring you as
witness over them ? I saw that his eyes were shedding tears He
said to me
: This is sufficient now. Seeing this condition, my mind
became filled up with fear.
Those were God-fearing people who used to faint when they
heard some verse of the Quran and even some of them met with
instantaneous death. God says
: How many signs there are in the
heaven and earth which pass by them but they turn there aces
trom them. A wise man said
: Whose recites the Quran and does
not imbue himself with
that idea. God says
to him
• What
connection have you got with My word ? You have turned your
face from me. The sinner who reads theQuran repeately is like a
man who reads the letter of the king repeatedly. Therein there is
order to him for making his reign firm but he remains busy to
recite it and thinks that to read the letter is sufficient. If he does
not read the letter and acts contrary to the order of the king
his
order is hated and he becomes an object of wrath of the king! He
who acts contrary
to the commands of the Quran
is guiltv
according to this verse
: They threw
it behind them and took
small price m lieu of it. How bad is that which they purchase.
**oph
,
et said: Recite the Ouran till you pay attention to it
and
,f
dl
th
f
skin of y°ur h°dy
is alright. Close
it when
this
condition does not remain. God says
: When Cod is remined to
them, their hearts become soft and when the verses are read out
to them, their faith increases and they rely ove/ their Lord. The
Prophet said
: The sweetent voice in reciting the Quran is of that a
man wh° fears God when he makes it recitation. The Prophet
said. The Quran
is not heard from anybody so sweet as
it is
223
Vol-I
THE BOOK WORSHIP
heard from the God-fearing men. When the Prophet expired, he
left behind him twenty thousand companions out of whom only
six committed the whole Quran by heart Majority of the
companions committed to memory only one or two chapters.
TheymovedtheirtongueverylittleastheQuranreciterswithout
action are fit to receive rebuke according to the following verse
If a man turns away from My remembrance, there is narrow
provisk>n for him and he will be raised up blind on the
Resurrection Day. This verse is also applicable to him
: This My
verse came to you butyou forgot it. You will be forgotten to. day
inasimilarmanner.
(9) To raise up mind. Raise up your mind by reciting the
Quran so much that you are hearing the words of God. There are
three excellences in reciting the Quran. The lowest excellence is
that a man should think that he recites the Quran standing before
God and that He sees and hears his recitation. At this time, he
should invoke and pray. Secondly your mind will bear witness at
the time of reciting the Quran that God sees you and He
is
speaking secretly with you. You should apply your full mind to it
and be careful of its understanding. Thirdly, you will see God in
the recitation of the Quran and His attributes.
The reciter who is outside these three things gets the rank of
the heedless. Imam Jafar Saleq said with regard to the highest
rank
: By God, God disclosed His light for His servants in His
words but they do not see
it. He once fell in swoon in prayer.
When he regained his senses, he said
: I was repeatedly reciting
the verse of the Quran in my heart and I then heard it as it were
from its author. My body could not stand at His glory. If the mind
is rasied high, one can get sweetness
in invocation. Hazrats
Osman and Huzaifah said
: If the mind becomes pure, it cannot
rest satisfied only with the recitation of the Quran. The sage Sabet
Bonani said
: I bore hardships for 20 years and have been getting
His gifts for the last 20 years. One can become fit for this verse on
account of his sight of the author of words
: Flee towards God.
Another verse. Don't set up partner with God/ He who does not
see Him in his every action, sees someone else and he who Iooks
to anything besides God sees towards secret Shirk. To see nobody
in any action except God is sincere Tauhid.
(10) To be free from ones own strength and ability and not to
see towards himself with the eye of pleasure and purity. When

224
RECITATION OF THE QURAN
Vol-I
you read the words of praise of pious men, don't include yourself
among them, but hope that God may include yourself amone
them. When you read
the verse of the punishment of the
transgressors, think that it was said about you. Hazrat Ibn Omar
inHdeHty
37 ° G°d ' 1 **** forgiveness from you for
sins and
SECTION 4
TO INTERPRET THE QURAN ACCORDING TO
INDIVIDUAL OPINION
The Prophet said
: If a man explains the Quran accordine to
his ppinion, let him, seek his abode in Hell'. Thelearned men who
explain
it accordmg to its literal meaning accuse the Sufis for
thor explanation. They explain the verse of the Quran which Ibn
Abbas or other companions did not make. The spirit of the above
Hadis is that the Quran should be interpreted according to the
saymgs and doings of the Prophet. Difference arises when it is
beheved that there is no meaning of the Quran except its open
meaning of the Quran is wide to the wise. Hazrat
Ali said
: God has given His servant the understanding of the
Quran. If it is not without the Tafsirs of the early sages, what is
the meamng of this understanding ? The Prophet said
: Thereare
surely for the Quran open meaning, secret meaning, limits and
different steps
Hazrat Ali said
: If
I wish,
I can load seventy
camels with Tafsir of the chapter Fateha' What is it meaning?
*
H
f
Zi
at^bU Darda
'a said: Nobody can be Faqih
till he
accepts the Quran in different forms. A certain learned man said
•
There are sixty meanings of every verse Another learned man
said
: The Quran is the embodinent of 77,200 Ieaming as everv
word is a learnmg and it is increased four times. Everv word has
got Jts external and internal meanings and has got high, higher
ti^p
hl
|
HeSt
!
tepS ' The ProPhet once recited 'Bismillah' twfnty
times. For what purpose was
it nead repeatedly except for its
mner meanmg ? Hazrat Ibn Masud said
: If a man desires to gain
nowledge of the earlier and future peoples, he should ponder
over the Quran. It is not acquired by only external Tafsirs. The
The^nrp th
S
i
H,S
. gIory and miSht whicB are unlimited.
Therefore the explanations of the Quran are unlimited.
The Prophet said: Read the Quran and search for
its
unknown matters. The Prophet said about Hazrat Ali
: By One
Vol-I
THE BOOK WORSHIP
225
who sent me with tmth, my followers
will be divided into
seventy three sects in matters of the fundamental principles of
religion and Jamaat. Every sect will be misguided and call
towards Hell. When it will occur, hold firm to the Book of God, as
it contains the stroires of your predecessors and successors and
decisions about what you
differ. Whose opposes the Quran
among the transfressors, God punishes him. Whose search
leaming other than the Quran, God misguides him as the Quran
is tile firmest tie, open light and benefiting medicine. If anybody
holds
it firm,
it protects him.
If one follows
it,
it gives him
salvation. There is no cutting of the miracles of the Quran and it
does not become old for repeated readings. When the Prophet
told Huzaifa of different sects and differences, he asked him
: O
Prophet of God, if I get that time, what do you order me to do ? He
said
: Leam the Book of God and act upon it, as there is saIvation
in it. Hazrat Ali said
: He who understands the Quran acquires all
the learnings together. There
is hint in
this that the Quran
contains all the leamings. The Quran says
: He who has been
given wisdom has been given abundant good. Hazrat Ibn Abbas
explained this word wisdom as the knowledge of the Quran. God
says
: I gaye Soloman knowledge, wisdom and learning. What
has been given to him was termed as wisdom and learning. The
speciality which has been given to him is learning and it has been
given to him before wisdom.
Regarding the external meaning of the Quran, there are
innumerable sayings of the Prophet. The Prophet said
: He who
interprets the Quran according to his own opinion should seek
his abode in Hell Thus he prohibited individual interpretation
according
to his own opinion. Hazrat Abu BaRr said
:
If
I
interpret the Quran according to my opinion what world will
give me protection and what sky will give me shade
? This
prohibition has got two objects. The first object is to limit it in
Hadis and Tafsir, not to discover new meanings and to give up
independent thinking. The second object is other than that. If its
object is that a man cannot interpret the Quran except according
to the standard Tafsirs, it is void for the reasons given below.
(1) One condition of interpretation is that it should rest upon
the interpretation of the Prophet.
If it is accepted. TafsirsofIbn
Abbas and Ibn Masud cannot be accepted as they had
their
opinion also therein.

226
RECITATION OF THE QURAN
Vol-I
(2) There are different opinions regarding the inter pretation
of some verses among the companions.
It was not possible for
them to be unanimous.
Everybody did not interpret
it after
hearing it from the Prophet, then their own opinions are fit to be
rejected.
It is well known that the interpreters extracted many
meanings by applying their intellect.
Even they had seven
interpretations of the abbreviated words at the beginning of a
chapter. So how can it be said that they interpretated them by
hearing every thing from the Prophet?
(3) The Prophet prayed for Ibn Abbas by saying
: O God, give
him knowledge in theology and give him learning
of
interpretation. What is then the meaning of his special prayer for
him if interpretation cannot come except from his saying?
(4) 'Those who discover meaning by their intellect know it
certainly'- in
this verse,
to discover meanings by exercise of
intellect by the learned men has been spoken of.
To discover
open meanings
is different from what
is heard. The tradition
regarding the interpretation of the Quran
is opposed
to
this
verse.
So
it appears that it is incorrect to impose condition of
Tafsir only in all interpretations and it is lawful to discover the
meaning of the Quran according
to the limit of one's own
intelligence and intellect.
There are however two reasons for the prohibition of
interpreting the Quran according to one's opinion. One reason is
that a man has got his own individual opinion with regard to
every matter and actually he is inclined to that opinion. He also
interprets the Quran according to his wish and desire to serve his
own end.
For this reason he thinks that his interpretation is
correct and lawful. He recites the Quranic verses to support his
opinion. Thus he decries his adversary and he knows that this is
not real meaning. This is interpretation according to one's own
misguided opinion. The Prophet said
:
Eat pre-dawn tiffin as
there is blessing in
it. They interpret it as Zikr in place the real
meaning
tiffin. The Quran
says: Go
to Pharaoh as he has
transgressed the limit. They interpret the word 'Pharaoh' as heart.
(2) To discover the meanings of those verses which are not
understandable and short without Hadis and Tafsir. He who is
not expert in extemal meanings and discovers their meanings
only by intellect commit many mistakes. He belongs to that class
Vol-I
THE BOOK WORSHIP
227
of men who interpret it according to their opinions. At first, there
is necessity of Hadis and Tafsir for external meanings in order to
be free from mistakes and then with the advancement of
knowledge, meanings come out from intellect. He who claims to
have internal meanings of the Quran without at first being expert
in its external meanings is like a man who claims to have reached
the interior of a house without first approaching its door or like a
man who claims to have understood the object of a Turk vyithout
understanding his language.
To learn open meaning
is like
learning a language.
In Tafsir, there
is explanation of also
internal meanings. For instance, God says
: I gave to the nation of
Samud a she-camel as open sign but they made oppression on
account of it. Here the word 'sign' is omitted. He will interpret it
openly by saying that the she camel had power of sight and was
not blind. God says
: On account of their infidelity, dring of calf
was given to their hearts.
In other words, they thought the
worship of calf as dear on account of their indfidelity. Here to
think 'dear' hasbeenomitted. God says :Igaveyou to tasteof life
on the taste of death. In other words:
I gave you the taste of
severity of punishment of
life and of death. The word
'punishment' has been omitted in this verse. God says
: Ask the
city where we were and the mountain to which we proceeded. In
other words. Ask the inhabitants of the town and the mountain.
The word 'inhabitants' have been omitted.
God says
:
It has
become heavy in heavens and earth. In other words: It has been
made secret for the inhabitants of the heavens and earth God says
: You make your provision such as if you are telling lies. In other
words
: You express gratefulness for your provision. God says
:
I
have revealed
it in the Blessed night.
In other words,
I have
revealed the Quran in the Blessed night. God says
: Till it became
covered with screen.
'It' means here sun. God says
: Peace be on
A1 Yasin. The latter word means Elias.
The word 'Qareen' has got different meanings.
It means
angel in this verse
: His companion (angel) said
: He who is near
me is a rebel. It means the devil in this verse
: His companion
(devil) said
: O otir Lord, I ha ve not misguided him. Similarly, the
word "Ummat” has got different meanings in the Quran. It means
a group of men in this verse
: He saw a party of men to give drink
of water. It means the followers of a Prophet in this verse: We
belong
to the followers of Muhammad
(P.H.).
It means the
possessor of all virtues in this verse
: Abraham was possessor of

228
RECITATION OF THE QURAN
VoI-I
all virtues. It iheans an age in this verse : Up to a fixed age. Similar
is the case with the meaning of the word "Ruh."
(6) To interpret the same subject gradually. God say
: The
month of Ramzan in which the Quran has been revealed. This
verse does not disclose when it was revealed, day or night. Then
the next versesays
: I revealed it in a blessed night. This verse first
sp>eaks of revelation by night. Then this verse was revealed
:
I
revealed it in the blessed night.
Then
to take internal meaning of a
verse, Tafsir
is not
sufficient. God says
: You have not shot arrows when you shot
arrows but God shot arrows. The external meaning of the
sentence is clear, but its intemal meaning is one secret as there is
therein the meanmgs of both throwing arrows and not throwing
arrows which are contradictory to each other. So the knowledge
of the reason of throwing is7 essential. The reason for which it is
said that you did not throw arrows but God threw arrows is in
the following verse
: Fight with them God will punish them
through your hands. This
lies in the deep ocean of spiritual
knowledge. Firstly, know that the action of a man is tied up with
his strength and that strength is tied up with the power of God.
Every verse of the Quran similarly has got a secret meaning. It is
clear to those whose hearts are clear of impurities of thoughts
and ideas. So open Tafsirs are not sufficient for understanding
the internal meanings of verses. These internal meanings are not
opposed to the extemal meanings. God knows best.
CHAPTER IX
ZIKR AND INVOCATIONS
God says
: Remember Me, I will remember you. He ordered
His servants to pray and to invoke by this verse
: Invoke me, I will
respond to you. So the religious, sinners, near and distant ones
should pray to God for fulfillment of their desires. He says
: I am
near. I respond to the invocation of one who invokes Me. So there
is nothing better than God's Zikr and invocations to Him. This
will be discussed in five sections.
SECTION
EXCELLENCE OF ZIKR
God says
: Remember Me.
I shall remember you. The sage
Sabet Bonani said
: I know when my Lord remembers me. The
people asked him How do you know ? He said
: He remembers
me when I remember Him. God says: Rem,ember God too much.
He says
: When you retum from Arafat, remember God near
Masharu', Haram and remember Him as God has given you
guidance. God says
: When you finish the institutions of Haj,
remember God more than you remember your parents at that
time. God says
: They are wise who remember God standing,
sitting and lying on a side. God says
: When you finish prayer,
remember God standing, sitting, and lying on your sides. Hazrat
Ibn Abbas said
: Remember God day and night, on land and
water, in jounery and habitation, in solvency and want, in health
and disease, openty and secretly. God says rebuking the
hypocrites
: They remember God very
little. God says
:
Remember your Lord in your heart with humility and in fear
silently moming and evening and be not of the heedless. God
says
: Zikr of God is the highest. Hazrat Ibn Abbas said
: This is
for two reasons. One reason is that God's remembrance of you is
better than your remembrance of God. Another reason is that
God's remembrance is better than all other divine services.
HADIS: This Prophet said
: One engaged in the Zikr of God
among the heedless is like a living tree in the midst of dry trees.
He said
: One busy in Zikr in the midst of the heedless is like a
warrior in the way of God in the midst of those soldiers who fled
away. The Prophet said
: God says
: I remain with a servant till he
remembers Me and moves his lips for Me. There is no action of

230
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
Vol-I
man except Zikr of God which can give him salvation. They
asked him
: O Prophet of God, not even jihad in the way of God?
He said
: Not even jihad in the way of God, except that it will give
salvation only when it is cut to pieces owing to your strike by
your sword and then it is again cut to pieces owing to your strike
by your sword. The Prophet said
: If anybody wishes to enter the
garden of paradise, let him remember God much. He was asked
:
Which action is best ? He said
: Your meeting with death in the
condition of your tongue being saturated with Zikr of God. The
Prophet said
: Saturate your tongue with the Zikr of God
morning and evening, you will have no sin morning and
evening. He said
: God
rs Zikr morning and evening is better than
attack with sword
in the way of God and giving wealth in
charity. The Prophet said
: God says
: When My servant
remembers Me silently,
I remember Him
silently. When he
remembers Me among the people,
I remember him among a
party better than them. When he comes to Me half a cubit, I
advaA*ceto him a cubit. When he comes to Me a cubit, I go to him
two cubits. When he comes to Me on foot, I go to him hastily. The
Prophet said
: On the day when there will be no shade except the
shade of God, God
will give shade under His shade seven
persons-one who remembers God sincerely and shed tears for
fear of God etc. The Prophet said
: Shall I not inform you of an
action dearest to God, greatest to your Lord, highest in rank,
better fruitful than charity of your gold and silver and your
striking with sword the necks of the enemies of God and the
strike on you necks ? They said
: O Messenger of God, what is it?
He said
: Constant remembrance of God. The Prophet said
: God
says
:
If a man refrains from invoking Me because of his
remaining busy with my remembrance
I give him better than
those who invoke Me.
Wise sayings. The sage Fuzail said
: We have been informed
that if a man makes God's Zikr one hour after the moming prayer
and one hour after the Asr prayer, it expiates all his sins. A wise
man said
: God says
: If I see My Zikr prevailing in the mind of a
man,
I take the administration of his affairs and
I become his
companion, adviser and friend. Hasan Basari said
: Zikr is of two
kinds—(1) God's Zikr in your mind and (2) better than this is to
remember God at the time of commission of an unlawful action.
Some said that every soul will come out of the world thirsty
except one which remembers God. Muaz-b-Jabal said
: The
Vol-I
ZIKR AND INVOCATION
231
inmates of Paradise will not grieve for anything except for the
time which passed without remembrance of God.
EXCELLENCE OF THE ASSEMBLY OF ZIKR
The Prophet said
: If a party of men are engaged in the Zikr of
God, the angels surround them, rnercy encompasses them and
He remembers them before His near angels. The Prophet said
: If
a party of men makes Zikr of God
for pleasure of God a
proclaimer proclaims from heaven : Your sins haye been forgiven
and you have been given virtues in lieu of your sins. The Prophet
said
: If a party of men make no Zikr of God sitting together and
send no blessing on the Prophet, they will be repentant on the
Resurrection Day. Prophet David said
: O my Lord, when you see
me joining the heedless after giving up the assembly of Zikr ot
God, break my feet under their feet, as it will be a gift cast upon
me, The Prophet said
: An assembly of virtue of the belieyers
expiate two thousand assemblies of sin. Hazrat Abu Hurairah
said
• As you see the stars, so the inmates pfheaven see a house of
the inmates
of the world wherein God
is temembered.
Sufiyan-b-Aynah said
: When a party of men gather together and
remember God, the devil and the world become separate from
them. The devil says to the world
: Don't you see what they are
doine”? The world says
: Leave them as when they
will be
sebarate from one another, I will take them to you catchmg their
necks Hazrat Abu Huraiah said that he went one day mto the
market and said
:
I see you here, but the properties left by the
Prophet are being distributed inthe mosque. The People went to
the mosque but saw no distribution of any property. They then
went to Abu Hurairah and said
: O Abu Hurairah, we fmd no
distribution of property in the mosque. He asked
: What then
have you seen ? They said
: We found a party of men makmg Zikr
0 f God and reciting the Quran. He said
: This is the heritage of the
Prophet. The Prophet said
: Some angels of God roam m the
world and write down additional record of deeds. If they see a
party of believers making Zikr of God, they proclaim
: Come with
your actions. They come with their actions and they take them
towards the heaven. God says
: What action of My servants have
you seen ? They say
: We saw them praising Three, glo” fY«nS
Thee and declaring Thy purity. God says
: Do they see Me They
say
: No. God says
: If they could have seen Me, how will it be?
They said
: If they could have seen Thee they would have rectied

232
THE EfOOK OF WORSHIP
Vol-I
Thy Tasbih, Tahmid and Tamzid more, God says to them
: From
what thing do they seek reguge ? They say : From Hell. God says
Have they seen it? They said
: No. God says
: If they had seen it,
what would they have done? They said
: If they had seen it, they
would have fled away more from
it. God says
: What do they
seek. They say
: Paradise. God says
: How will it be if they had
seen it ? They say
: If they has seen it, they would have desired it
more. God says
: I bear witness before you that I have forgiven
them. They say
: A certain man did not come to them with that
object except for his own personal needs. God says
: They are
such party whose companion will not be unfortunate.
EXCELLENCE OF TAHLIL
The Prophet said: What I said first and also my predecessor
prophets is this—'there is no deity but God. He is One, there is no
partner for Him. The Prophet said
: He who recites this Doa one
hundred times There is no deity but God, the single, there is no
partner for Him, kingdom is His and all praise is His and He is
powerful over all things", the rewards of setting free ten slaves
are written for him, one hundred rewards are written in his
record of deeds and one hundred sins are wiped out from him
and he remains safe from the machinations of the devil on that
day up to night. He who does more than this, his rewards are
more and nobody acts more virtuou&g.ct than it. The Prophet said
: He who makes ablution and reads/Doa after looking towards
heaven
"Ibear witness that there
is no deity but God. He
is
single, there
is no partner for Him and
I bear witness that
Muhammad is His servant and apostle", the doors of Paradise are
opened up for him and he enters it by whichever door he likes.
The Prophet said
: Those who utter—"There is no deity but God"
there will be no loneliness for them in their grave or after their
resurrection from the grave.
I am seeing them as it were when
they utter it loudly, their heads are emerging from earth and they
are uttering 'all praise is due to God who removed sorrows from
us. Our Lord is forgiving, acceptor of gratefulness/ The Prophet
said
: O Abu Hurairah, the virtues which you do will be weighed
on the Resurrection Day, but the attestation of 'There is no deity
but God' will not be weighed, because if it is weighed in a scale
and the seven heavens and seven earths and what is in then both
are placed in another scale, the scale of "There is no deity but
God" will be heavier. The Prophet said
: If anybody commits sin
Vol-I
ZIKR AND INVOCATION
233
on the surface of the earth after uttering There is no deity but
God', God will forgive him. The Prophet said
: O Abu Hurairah,
tell the dying man to attest—There is no deity but God'. as
it
destroys sins. I said
: O Prophet of God, this is for the dying man.
What are the rewards for a man who is alive ? The Prophet said
:
He who utters with sincere heart—'There is no deity but God'
will enter Paradise. The Prophet said
: Everyone amongst you
will enter Paradise except one who denies it and turns his face
from God like the turning of the face of a she-camel. He was
asked
: O Prophet of God, who denies and tums his face from
God? He said
: That person who does not utter There is no deity
but God'. Utter much "There
is no deity but God" before
hindrance comes between you and it, as it is a word of Tauhid,
word of sincerity, word of God
fear, word of purity, calling
towards truth and the foundations of Paradise. God says : Is there
any reward for doing (Ihsan) good except good ? It is said that
Ihsan of this world is—'There is no deity but God' and the Ihsan
of the next world is Paradise. God says
: Those who do good will
get good reward and still more. The Prophet said
: If a man utters
ten time—"There is no deity but God'. He is single, there is no
partner for Him, the kingdom is His and praise is His and He is
powerful over all things." the reward of setting free a slave is
written for him. The Prophet said
:
If a man utters a day two
hundred times the above mentioned Doa, nobody will be able to
go before him and nobody will catch him after him except one
who does actions better than those of his. The Prophet said
: If a
man goes to the market and utters 'There is no deity but God, He
is single, there is no partner for Him, His is the kingdom and His
is
all praise, He gives
life and takes
life, He is powerful over
everything"—God writes for him one lac virtues, forgives one lac
sins and builds for him a house in Paradise. The Prophet said
: He
who utter the aforesaid Doa ten times, will get the rewards of
setting free four slaves belonging to the dynasty of Hazrat Ismail.
The Prophet said
: He who wakes up at night and utter the
following Doa,
is forgiven of his sins and
if he prays after
abulution, his prayer is accepted—"There is no deity but God, He
is single, there is no partner for Him, knogdom is His, praise is
His, and He is powerful over all things. Glory be to God, all
praise is due to God, there is no deity but God, God is greatest,
there is no might or strength except in God, the great, the mighty.
O God forgive me."

234
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
VoI-I
SECTION 2
TASBIH, TAHMID AND OTHER ZIKERS
The Prophet said: If a man utters at the end of each prayer
'Sobhan Allah' thirty three times, 'Alham do Lillah' thirty three
times and 'Allaho Akbar' thirty three times and then utter once
"There is no deity but God, he
is single, there is no partner for
Him, kingdom is His, all praise is His, and He is powerful over all
things"
all
his sins are forgiven even though they are
innumerable like foams in a sea. (2) The Prophet said: If a man
utters everydays one hundred times 'Glory be to God and all
praise
is
his'
all
his
sins are forgiven even though they are
innumerable like the foams of a sea.
(3) A man came to the
Prophet and said: The world has forsaken me and
I have been
rendered poor and I am without means. The Prophet asked him:
Where do you stay? Don't you know the Doa by the blessings of
which angels and men get livelihood? He said: O Prophet of God,
what is that Doa? He said: After dawn and before Fajr prayer, if
you read this Doa one hundred times, the world will itself turn to
you and God will create one angel from each of its words who
will be engaged
in reading Tasbih up to the Resurrection Day
and you will get its reward: Glory be to God with all praise, Glory
be to God, the great.
I seek forgiveness of God. (4) The Prophet
said: When a servant utters "Alhamdo Lillah", he fills up what is
between heaven and earth. When he recites it for the second time,
he fills up seven heavens and seven earth. When he utters it for
the third time. God says: Pray and it will be responded to.
(5) Hazrat Refa'a Zarki said: Once we were praying behind
the Prophet. When he raised his head from bow, he said: 'God
hears one who praises Him', one uttered from behind the
Prophet: O our Lord, Thine is all praise, innumerable and pure,
full of blessings therein. When the Prophet finished his prayer, he
asked: Who has uttered this Doa just now? He said: O Prophet of
God,
I. The Prophet said:
I saw more than
thirty angels
competing as to who of them will write rewards.
(6) The Prophet said: The following words are called
ever-lasting good deeds: There is no deity but God/ 'Glory be to
God'. 'All praise is for God'. 'Allah is greatest. There is no might
or strength except in God'.
Vol-I
ZIKR AND INVOCATION
235
(7) The Prophet said: There is no such servant whose sins are
not forgiven even though they are as innumerable as the foam of
the sea if he utters these words: There is no deity but God. God is
greatest. Glory be to God. All praise is for God and 'There is no
might or strength except in God/
(8) The Prophet said: If Zikr is recited glorifying God, and
Tasbih, Tahmid and Takbir are recited, humming of voices are
heard like the humming of bees round the Throne. They make
Zikr along with them and nobody among you ceases to make
Zikrof God.
(9) The Prophet said:
I recite the following Doa and love it
better than all the things upon which the sun sheds rays: Glory be
to God, all praise.is due to God, 'there is no deity but God, God is
greatest.
(10) The Prophet said: To God, four words are dear
Sobhan-Allah, Alhamdo-Lillah, La Ilaha Illallah, AIlahu-Akbar.
By whichever of these you begin,
it will not harm you. The
Prophet said: 'Sobhan Allah' is half of faith, 'Alham do Lillah'
fills up the scale. 'Sobhan Allah and Allaho Akbar' fill up what is
between i.eaven and earth. Prayer
is light, charity
is proof,
patience is radiance and the Quran is proof for you or against
you. Every man gets up at dawn ad either sells his soul and
destroys it or purifies his soul and frees it.
(11) The Prophet said: Two words are easy to be uttered but
heavy in scale and dear
to the Mercitul 'Sobhan Allah Wa
Behamdihi, Sobhan Allahul Azim. Abu Zarra said:
I asked the
Prophet: Which word is dearest to God? The Prophet said: That
word which God selected for His angels He quoted the above
formula. The Prophet said: God selected
this word: Sobhan
Allah, walhamdo Lillah, wala Ilaha
Illallah, wallaho Akbar.
When a man utters 'Sobhan Allah' twenty rewards are written for
him and twenty sins are wiped out. When he utters 'Allaho
Akbar' similar rewards are written. The Prophet said: If a man
utters 'Sobhan Allah wabihamdihi/ a palm tree is planted for
him in paradise.
(12) Once the poor said to the Prophet: The rich take the
rewards. They pray like us and fast but they get rewards from
their additional properties. He said: Has not God enjoined on
you charity? Every Tasbih of your
is an act of charity, every

236
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
Vol-I
Tahmid and Tahlil are acts of charity, every Takbir is an act of
charity, every enjoining good and forbidding evil is an act of
charity, the morsel of food you lift up to the mouth of your wife is
an act of charity, your sexual intercourse with your wife is an act
of charity. He said: O Prophet of God, does one of us coming to
his wife out of passion get rewards? The Prophet said: Don't you
see that if he throws his semen unto lawful things will he not
commit sins? He said: Yes. He said: Similarly if he throws it in
lawful thing, he will get rewards. Hazrat Abu Zarr said: I asked
the Prophet: The rich have already taken rewards. They do
whatever divine service we do but they spend and we cannot.
The Prophet said: Shall
I not give you due to such an action
which if you do, you will get the rewards of the actions of those
before you and you will get the rewards of those who will come
after you-33 times
Sobhan-Allah' at the end of each prayer,
'Alhamdo Lillah' 33 times and 'Allaho- Akbar' 34 times. The
Prophet said
: You shall recite Tasbih, Tahlil and Taqdis, Don't be
heedless and count them with fingers. The fingers will speak on
the Resurrection Day.
(13) The Prophet said: When a man utters at the time of his
death 'There is no might or strength except in God' the fire of Hell
will not touch him, The Prophet said
: Will not some one ofyou gain
one thousand rewards daily? It was replied
:O Prophet ofGod, how
can it occur ? He said
: Utter Tasbih one hundred times, then one
thousand rewards will be written for you and one thousand sins
will be effaced from you. The Prophet said
:O Abu Musa, shall I not
inform you of a jewel of Paradise under the Throne ? He said
: Yes.
He said
: Utter-There is no might or strength except in God.
(14) The Prophet said: He who utters at dawn the following,
it becomes the duty of God to please him on the Resurrection
Day: I am satisfied with God as Lord, Islam as religion, the Quran
as a guide and with Muhammad as a Prophet and Apostle.
Know, O dear readers, that if you question that it is easy to
utter words by tongue and is no such difficulty in Zikr of God,
then how is it that it is better than all other divine services? Know
that
its secrets are not understood except with the spiritual
knowledge. Of all the learnings relating to worldly affairs, the
most profitable and fruitful
is constant Zikr with humility of
spirit. If the mind is heedless at the time of Zikr with tongue, it
brings much less rewards, If there is no attention of mind at the
Vol-I
ZIKR AND INVOCATION
237
time of Zikr, there is little benefit therein, but constant Zikr with
attention or at most times is above all other divine services. This
is the end of divine services regarding actions. There is beginning
and end of Zikr. There is love at its beginning and love at its end.
At
first, a person feels great difficulty in turning
his mind
towards God. If it lasts with the grace of God, it begets love for
the Beloved. There is no wonder in
it. For this habit, he makes
Zikr in a lonely place far away from the bustles of the world. Thus
constant Zikr he gets love towards Him and so he loves more and
more Zikr. Then it grows into habit. A wise man said: I have been
reading the Quran for the
last twenty years and getting
its
blessings. This blessing was not possible without I've. This
trouble has now grown into habit. Man is a slave of habit and his
habit tums into his nature at the end. When there is eagerness for
Zikr, he forgets other things except God and it exists tilLhis death
God's Zikr will go with him in his grave and not his children and
properties. For this reason, the Prophet said: The Holy Spirit
infused into my soul: Love what you like but you shall have to
give it up at the end. In other words, sever all connections with
the world and it will end with death. Don't deny that Zikr of God
will go with you even after your death.
It is said how it is possible when there is the end of a man
after his death? There is no end of man after his death, so there is
no end of Zikr. He goes from the outside world and enters into
spiritual world just as a child comes out of its mother's womb
and falls into this world. The Prophet hined at it by saying: Grave
is a hole of Hell or a garden of Paradise. The Prophet said: The
souls of martyrs lie in the wombs of green birds. Addressing the
polythiests by names, the Prophet said: O such person, O such
person, have you found true whatyour Lord has promised you? I
have found true what my Lord has promised me. Hazrat Omar
asked the Prophet: O Prophet of God, when they have become
dead, how can they hear and how can they reply? The Prophet
said: By One in whose hand there is my life, you do not hear my
words better than them, but they cannot reply. The Prophet said:
The soul of the believers and the martyr remain with in the bellies
of green birds hanging under the Throne'. So the existence of Zikr
cannot be refused from the hearts of the above persons. God says:
Don't think those wbo are martyred in the way of God as dead
but they are alive before their lord and they are given provision.
They remain satisfied with what God has given them and give

238
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
Vol-I
good news to those who could not earn that'. They get the honour
of martyrdom on account of the honour of God's Zikr as their
object is death in good condition and they return to God after
renouncing the world. Their thought are for the sake of God and
they become prepared for real life after giving up his children
and properties.
EXCELLENCE OF MARTYRDOM: There
are many
traditions regarding the excellence of martyrdom, some of which
have been narrated below. When Abdullah-b-Ansari was
martyred at the battle of Uhud, the Prophet said to his son Jaber:
O Jaber, shall I not give you good news? He said: Yes, may God
give you news of good. He said: God has given your father life
and kept him seated near Him and there
is now no screen
between him and God. God said to him: O My servant pray to Me
whatever you wish. I will give it to you. He said: O God, if Thou
wiseth, send me again to the world till I am martyred for thee and
for Thy Prophet. God said: Order has gone from Me that a dead
man cannot return'. To be martyred in this condition is his death
in good condition, because if he would not have been a martyr
and livedfor sometime, sweetness of the world would have
returned to him and
it would have diverted his mind from the
remembrance of God. For this reason, the greatest fear of a God
fearing man is at the time of his death, as mind may change at that
time even
if Zikr of God keeps attached to
it. One dies in the
condition in which he ends his life and his resurrection takes
place in
that condition. Thus the mind of a martyr becomes
prepared only for God after all connections with the world are cut
off. Hence the reward of martyrdom is greatest. Every object of
desire is deity and every deity
is an object of worship. When a
martyr has got no object of desire except Him, he saysbythe tongue
of condition There is no diet but God/ He who utters this by his
tongue but his condition does not help him, his affair is upon God
and he can't be safe from harm. For this reason the Prophet gave
superiority to There is no deity but God' to other Zikrs. Whoever
likes to meet with God. He also likes to meet him and whoever does
not like to meet wit Him, God also does not want to meet him. This
is thesecretof Zikr.
EXCELLENCE OF DOA AND RULES
God says: When My servant asks of Me to you, say: I am near.
I respond to one who calls Me when he calls Me. So invoke Me.
VoI-I
ZIKR AND INVOCATION
239
God says: Invoke God with modesty and secretly. He does not
love the transgressors as God says: Call Me, I will respond to you.
Those who refrain from My remembrance out of vanity will enter
Hell abased. God says
: Say
: God has got good names by
whatever names you call Him-Allah or Rahman. The Prophet
said: Monazat is divine service. Then he recited: Call Me, I will
respond
to you. The Prophet said: Monazat is the narrow of
worship. He said: There
is nothing more honourable than
Monazat. The Prophet said: Let no man forget to invoke either of
these three things-forgiveness of his sins, hastnening of good for
him or preserving good for him. The Prophet said: Seek favour of
God, as He loves invocation. The best worship is to wait for
compulsory prayer.
TEN RULES OF INVOCATION
(1) Choose the best time for invocation, for instance on the
day of Arafat, in the month of Ramzan, on the Jumma Day and
the last portion of the night. God says: They seek forgiveness by
the latter part of the night. The Prophet said: God descends every
night at its last one third portion in the heaven of the earth and
says: Who will invoke Me that I may accept his invocation? Who
will seek from Me that I may accept his prayers? Who will seek
forgiveness from Me that I may forgive him. Hazrat Eakub used
to make prayer with his children for forgiveness in the after part
of the night standing in prayer. God then said to him:
I will
forgive them and make them Prophets.
(2) To
take advantage of honourable condition. Hazrat
Abu Hurairah said: The doors of heaven are opened in Juha in
the way of God, at the time of concourse of men in rows of
prayer, at the time of rain fall and at the time of Aqamat of
compulsory prayer. Invoke at that time. Muzahed said
: You
should invoke at the end of prayer. The Prophet said
:
Invocation is not rejected in between Azan and Aqamat. He
said
: 'The invocation of a fasting man is not rejected/ The best
times are the time of Sheri, purity of mind and sincerity, the
day of Arafat, the time of prostration. The Prophet said
: A man
becomes near God at the time of prostration. Invoke much at
that time. The Prophet said
: I have been prohibited to read the
Quran in Ruku and prostration. Proclaim the glory of God in
Ruku and take trouble of invoking in prostration, as it is the
appropriate time of its acceptance.

240
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
Vol-I
ZIKR AND INYOCATION
241
Vol-I
(3)
Invoke facing the Qibla and raise up your hand so high that
the whiteness of the hand is visible. It is stated that the Prophet
waited facing the Ka'ba on the Arafat Day and kept on invoking till
the sun set. The Prophet said
: Your Lord is bashful and honourable.
Whenever anybody raises up his hands. He feels shy to retum in
empty handed. Hazrat Anas reported that the Prophet used to raise
up his hands so high that the whiteness of his hands could be seen.
Oncethe Prophet saw as man making invocation and hinting by his
two hngers. He said
: one, one. He hinted to make it short. Hazrat
Omar said that the Prophet extended his hands and did not take
them down until he touched his face with them. Hazrat Ibn Abbas
said that whenever the Prophet invoked, he united the front potion
of his hands and mbbed his face with the interior of his palms. The
Prophet said
: Let not the people look towards the sky at the time of
invocation or shut up their sight.
(4) Keep your voice between expression and silence. Hazrat
Abu Musa Ash'ari said
: When we came near Medina with the
PropheL he recited Takbir and the people also recited Takbir
Loudly. The Prophet said
: O people, He whom you call is not
deaf and not absent. He whom you call is between you and your
necks. Hazrat Ayesha said
: God says
: Don't raise your voice
high in prayer, nor keep it concealed. God praised His Prophet
Zakariyah when he called his Lord by silent voice.
(5) Don't use omamental words in invocation. He who invokes
should be humble. The Prophet said
: Soon a people appear who
wiH exaggerate in invocation God says
: He does not Iove the
transgressors. This is in reference to those who use omamental
words in invocation. Pray for what is good. The Prophet said
: Give
up omamental words in invocation. It is said that the leamed and
Abdals used not more than seven words in their invocation.
(6) Invoke with fear and hope and with humility and
modesty. Humility and modesty are dear to God. God says
: They
hasten in good deeds
and invoke Me with hope and fear. The
P-ophet said
: If God loves a man. He tries him HII he sees in him
humility and modesty.
(7) Believe that your invocation will be accepted and hope
therein for truth. The Prophet said
: When a man invokeS/ let him
not say
: O God, gi ve me if Thou wiseth. Be firm in invocaHon as
there is nobody to reject it. The Prophet said
: When one of you
invokes, make your hope great as there is nothing great to God.
The Prophet said
: Invoke God and entertain a firm belief that
your invocaHon will be accepted and know that God does not
accept the invocation of a headless man. SuHyan Saori said
: Let
nobody prevent you to make invocation with what you know as
God accepted the invocation of the worst being of the creation,
the devil. When he prayed
: O God, give me respite up to the
ResurrecHon day. God said
: Your prayer is accepted.
(8) Invoke firmly three times. Hazrat Ibn Masud said:
Whenever the Prophet invoked, he invoked
thrice. Don't be
hasty to se your invocaHon acceptd as the Prophet said: The
invocation of any of you is accepted if not sought hasHly. Don't
say,
I invoked but it has not been accepted. When you invoke,
invoke too much, as you are invoking to the Merciful. A certain
wise man said: I have been invoking God for the last twenty years
but He is not accepting my invocaHon, yet I hope, my invocaHon
will be accepted. The Prophet said: When any of you prays to his
Lord and gets sign of its acceptance, let him say: All praise is due
to God under all circumstances.
(9) Begin invocaHon with Zikr of God. Don't invoke at the
start. Hazrat Salma said:
I c|id never see the Prophet invoking
without
first saying: Sobhana Rabbial Ula wal wahhab. Abu
Solaiman Darani said: If a man wishes to invoke God for any
necessity, let him begin with blessings on the Prophet and then
pray end and then end it witl\ such blessing as God accepts the
invocaHon of those who send blessing on Prophet. The Prop*het
said: When you invoke God for any necessity, bgin
it after
blessings on me as the Mercihil God
fulfills one of the two
honoured necessiHes and reject another.
(10) Observe the internal manners and
it’ is the root of
acceptance of Tauba, means of preventing oppressiori, means to
seek nearess to God and a near cause of acceptance of inyocation,
Ka'ba-b-Ashab narrated that there was a great famine over the
people at the time of Moses. He came out with the children of
Israil for invoking for rain but it did not come. Then God revealed
to Moses: I will accept not your invocation and the invocation of
your companions as there
is a back-biter amongst you.^Moses
asked: Who is that man? We shall eject him from our company God
revealed to him: O MoseS/ 1 have prohibited you back-biting.How
shall I be a back-biter? Then Moses said to the children of Israil:

243
242
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
Vol-I
Make repentance for back-biting and retum to your Lord: They
all repented. Then God sent down rain upon them.
The sage Sufiyan Saori said: I have come to know that the
children of Israil suffered famine for seven years, even they
began
to eat dead animals and young children. God sent
revelation to their Prophet: If you come to Me walking on foot
and enliven your tongues by invoking Me, I will not accept your
invocations and will not show kindness at your cries till you pay
compensation to those whom you have oppressed. They did so
and there was rain upon them.
Malek-b-Dinar said: There was once a famine over the
children of Israil. They came out several times invoking for rain.
God then revealed to their Prophet: Inform them that they have
come to Me with impure bodies and unlawful food in their lies
and they raised the fronts of their hands which shed unlawful
blood. My wrath upon them is therefore great.
Once Hazrat Solaiman came out invoking for rain. At that
time an ant raised up itsleg towards the sky and said: O God r we
are Thy creation and we have got necessity of provision. Don't
destroy us for the sins of others. Then Solaiman said
to the
people: Go, you will get rain as a result of the invocation of others
than you. Once Jesus Christ came out invoking for rain. He said
to the people: Let the transgressors go out of this assembly. None
but one remained with him Jesus asked him: Have you got no
sin? He said: By Godr
I don't know anything. One day
I was
praying when a woman was passing by me and I had a glance at
her. When she went away,
I plucked out me eyes. Jesus said to
him: Invoke God for acceptance. Then he invoked and there came
down heavy shower of rain.
Hazrat Ata stated that when he came out one day for praying
for rain, he saw a mad man near a burial ground. The mad man
prayed and owing to his prayer there was profuse rain. Then the
made man recited these poems:-
The ascetics and worshipers have found guidance,
For their Lord, they keep their bellies hungry,.
Their eyes remain awake being pressed by love.
They spend the whole night without sleep.
In meditation and, divine services of their Lord.
But the people think them fools and mad.
Vol-I
ZIKR AND INVOCATION
EXCELLENCE OF DARUD OR BLESSINGS
ONPROPHET
God says: God and His angels send blessings upon the
Prophet. O those who believe, send blessings on him and Salam.
It has been narrated that the Prophet said being satisfied: Gebriel
came to me and said: O Muhammad, are you not satisfied that if
one of your followers sends one blessing upon you, I send ten
blessings upon him and if he sends one salaam on you, I send on
him ten salams. The Prophet said: If a man sends blessings on me,
the angels send blessings on him. So increase or reduce blessings
on me at the time of sending it. The Prophet said: He who sends
much blessings on me
is best to me. He said:
It
is sufficient
miserliness on the part of a believer that if I am mentioned to him,
he does not send blessings on me. The Prophet said: Send much
blessing on me on the Jumma Day. He said: If a man among my
followers sends one blessing on me ten rewards are written for
him and his ten sins are forgiven. He said: If a man utters after
hearing Azan and Aqamtat "O God, Lord of this perfect
invitation and lasting prayer, send blessings on Muhammad, Thy
servant and Thy Apostle and give him means, excellence and
high position and intercession on the Resurrection Day",
it
becomes incumbent on me to intercede for him. The Prophet said:
If a man glorifies me by writing books, the angels pray to God for
his forgiveness till the book exists. He said: If a man sends salam
on me, God sends his salam to me and I respond to his salam. He
was asked: O Prophet of God, how shall we send blessings on
you? He said: Say, O God, send blessings on Muhammad, Thy
servant, and upon his family and wives and descendants as Thou
hast sent blessings on Abraham and upon the family of Abraham.
And give abundance to Muhammad, his wives and descendants
as Thou hast given abundance to Abraham and the family of
Abraham. Thou art the Most praised and glorified.
After the death of the Prophet, Hazrat Omar began to weep
and said: O Prophet of God, my parents be sacrificed to you. You
used to deliver sermon to the people standing on a wood of
grape. When there were large numbers of people, you have taken
a pulpit to make them hear but the wood began to tremble at your
separation. It became quiet when you placed your hand on it. At
the battle of Hunain, your fol!owers were innumerable but they
became attached to you. May my parents be sacrificed to thee. O

244
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
ZIKR AND INYOCATION
245
Vol-I
Prophet of God, your excellence has reached God as God will be
obeyed if you are obeyed. God says: He who obeys the Apostle of
God obeys God. O Apostle of God, may my parents be sacrifi(*ed
to you, your excellence has reached God. He gave you the news
of pardon before the news of sin. For that God says: God has
forgiven you for what you enjoin them.
O Prophet of God, my parents be sacrificed to you. Your
excellence has reached God. He sent you as the last Prophet but
He described you before
all. For that He says: When
I took
covenant from you and the Prophets etc. O Prophet of God, may
my parents be sacrificed
to you, your excellence has reached
God. The dwellers of Hell will wish how good it would have been
if they had obeyed you. When they will receive punishment in
different stages of Hell, they will say: Alas, had we obeyed god
and His Apostle!
O Apostle of God, may my parents be sacrified to you. Moses,
s°n of Imran, made to flow a stream of water from a stone. Is it
not more wonderfuI that water flowed down from your fingers?
O Prophet of God, may my parents be sacrified to you. God made
the wind subservient to Solaiman. He went one month's journey
at dawn and one month's journey at dusk.
Is
it not more
wonderful than the above that you travelled one night riding on
a B«raq the seven heavens and said prayer at the Ka'ba the same
very night? O Prophet of God, may my parent be sacrificed to
you. God gaye miracle to Jesus Christ, son of Mary, to make a
dead man alive.
Is
it not more wonderful than
it that cooked
mutton mixed wit poison spoke with you? Don't eat me. I have
got poison mixed with me.
O Prophet of God, may my parent be sacrificed to you. Noah
prayed to God about his people: O my Lord, don't leave a single
house of the unbelievers in the world. If you had prayed against
us in a similar manner, we would have been destroyed. Your
back was burdened, your front teeth were martyred, yet you did
not invoke against them but for good and said: O God, forgive
my people, as they know not what they do.
O Prophet of God, may my parents be sacrificed to you. Noah
was not fol!owed by so many people during his long stray as you
have been followed in a short time. Innumerable people believed
you. O Prophet of God, may my parents be sacrihced to you, if
Vol-I
you had not permitted people Iower in rank than you to come to
you, we could not have taken seat with you.
If you had not
married women except those of equal rank with you, we would
have no connection with you. If you had not taken meal except
with the people of equal rank with you, we could not get the
honour of taking food with you. By God, you kept company with
us, married in our families, put on sufi dress, rode on asses, took
companions behind, ate in cups of earth and licked your hands
aftereating.
EXCELLENCE OF ISTIGFAR OR
SEEKING FORGIVENESS
God says: When they do obscene acts or oppression on their
souls, they remember God and seek forgiveness for their sins.
Hazrat Abdullah-b-Masud said: There are two verses in the
Quran. If a man recites them after committing a sin and seeks
forgiveness to God. God forgives him. God says: He who does an
evil or oppreses on his soul and then seeks forgiveness to God,
will find Him forgiving and merciful. God says: Glorify your
Lord and seek forgiveness to Him. He accepts rej>entance. God
says: Those who seek forgiveness by the latter part of night etc.
The Prophet used often to say: Thou art pure with Thy praise,
Thou doth accept repentance, Thou art merciful. The Prophet
said: If a man seeks forgiveness much, God gives him solace in
every
trouble, makes his narrow space wide and gives him
provision beyond his conception. The Prophet said:
I seek
forgiveness to God and I make repentance to Him 72 times every
day. He used to do it inspite of his past and future sins being
forgiven. The Prophet said: Consolation does not come to my
mind
till
I seek forgiveness one hundred times a days. The
Prophet said: If a man recites thrice the following at the time of
going
to bed, God forgives his sins even though they are
innumerable like the foams of the sea, or like sands in a desert, or
like leaves in a
tree or like the days of the world T seek
forgiveness to God the Greatest, there is no deity but He, the
living, the every subsisting and I turn to him penitently."
The Prophet said: The sins of one who utters it are forgiven
even though he flees away from Jihad. Hazrat Ayesha said: The
Prophet said to me: If you are attributed any guilt of sin, seek
forgiveness to God, make repoatance to Him, be penitent and
seek forgiveness from sin. The Prophet used
to say about

246
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
Vol-I
forgiveness: O God, forgive me of my sins, my ignorance, my
extravagance and what you know of me. The Prophet said: If a
man commits a sin and then prays two ra'kats of prayer with
ablution and then seeks forgiveness to God, God forgives his sin.
The Prophet said: When a believer commits a sin, a black spot
falls in his heart. If he is repentant, returns and seeks forgiveness,
it is wiped out of his heart. If the sin increase, the black spot
increases. At last his heart becomes enve!oped with black spots.
This
is 'Ran' which has been spoken of by God in this verse:
Never, rather rust (Ran) has fallen in their hearts for what they
have done. Then the Prophet said: God created ranks in Paradise
for His servants. He says: O Lord, is this rank for me? God says:
This is your reward for prayer of your son. the Prophet said: O
God, include me among those who receivegood news when they
do good deeds and seek forgiveness when they do evils. The
Prophet said: When a servant commits a sin and says: O God
forgive me, God says: My servant has committed a sin and he
knows that his Lord will punish him and so he seeks forgiveness
for it and works for My pleasure, I forgive him. The Prophet said:
If a man did no virtuous act during his life but he looks towards
sky and says: O Lord, I have got my Lord, forgive me, God says: I
have forgiven you. The Prophet said: If a man commits a sin and
then understands that God is seeking him, he is forgiven though
he does not seek forgiveness. The Prophet said: God says: O My
servant,
all are sinners except one whom
I forgive. So seek
forgi veness to Me, I shall forgive you. One who understands that
I have got power to forgive,
I forgive him without care. The
Prophet said: If one says: O God, I have oppressed my soul and I
have done evil, forgive me, there is none to forgive except Thee,
God forgives him even though his sins are innumerable as ants.
The best Doa of forgiveness is this:-
O God, Thou art my Lord and
I am Thy slave. Thou hast
created me.
I am upon Thy covenant as far as possible.
I seek
refuge to Thee from the evils Thou created. I tum to Thee with the
gifts Thou hast bestowed on me. I turn to my soul with my sins. I
admit my sins. So forgive my sins. I admit my sins. So forgive my
past and future sins. None can forgive sins except Thou.
SAYINGS OF SAGES
Hazrat Khaled-b-Madan said: God says: The dearest of My
servants
to Me are those who love one another for My sake.
Vol-I
ZIKR AND INYOCATION
247
whose hearts keep attached to mosques, who seek forgiveness at
the latter part of night. I remember them when the inhabitants of
the world want their punishment and tum it back from them.
Hazrat Ali said: It is a wonder that one is destroyed even if he has
got means of salvation. He was questioned: What is it? He said:
To seek forgiveness. He also said: God forgives one for search of
forgiveness even though He wishes to punish him. The sage
Fuzail said: Seeking forgiveness without giving up sins is the
Tauba of the transgressors. The sage Abu Abdullah said: If your
sins are so innumerable as the drop of water and like the foams of
sea, they will be forgiven if you invoke God with a penitent and
sincere heart with the following: O God,
I seek forgiveness to
Thee from every sin etc.
SECTION 3
SELECTED INVOCATIONS
The Prophet used to pray after morning prayer: O God, I seek
mercy from Thee, such mercy with which Thou wilt guide my
mind, unite my virtues in me, remove my dangers and
difficultes, adorn my religion, protect my things in my absence,
purify my actions, make my face bright, my path radiant and
protect me from all evils. O God, give me true faith, such a faith
after which no infidelity will last, such a mercy with which I can
acquire the honour of Thy glory both in this world and in the
next-up to the end.
Invocation of Hazrat Ayesha: She said: The Prophet advised
me to invoke with the fallowing: O God, I seek from Thee good,
sooner or latter, known or unknown. I seek refuge to Thee from
all evils. I seek from Thee paradise and the actions leading to it,
sooner of latter, known or unknown. I seek refuge to Thee from
Hell and the actions leading to
it, sooner or latter, known or
unknown.
I seek from Thee good with which Thy servant and
Apostle Muhammad seeks good from Thee.
Invocation of Hazrat Abu Bakr: The Prophet instructed him
to invoke with the following: O God, I pray to Thee by the help of
Thy Apostle Muhammad, Thy friend Abraham, Moses with
whom Thou spoke, Thy word and Spirit Jesus Christ, the Torah
of Moses,
Injil of Jesus, Jabur of David and the Quran of
Muhammad (peace be on all)-up to the end.

248
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
Vol-I
Invocation of Qabisah: The Prophet instructed Qabisah to
invoke in his old age after morning prayer and to recite it thrice:
Glory be to God and all praise is His, Glory be to the great God.
There
is no might and power except in God,
the great,
the
mighty.. The Prophet said: When you invoke therewith, you will
be safe from anxieties, troubles, diseases and tuberculosis.
Regarding your next world, invoke with this: O God, guide me
from Thy guidance, show me favour from Thy favour, show me
mercy from Thy mercy and shower on me Thy blessing.
Invocation of Prophet Abraham: O God, this a new creation.
Open it on me on account of my allegiance to Thee and end it
with Thy pardon and pleasure. Give me rewards therein and
accept it from me. Purify it, make it weak for me and forgive me
the evils I commit in it. Thou art forgiving, merciful, magnificent
andbeloved.
Invocation of Prophet Jesus Christ: O God,
I have risen at
dawn. I am unable to remove what I dislike, I am unable to get
benefit of what I like. Affairs are in Thy hand, but I rise at dawn
by mortgage of my actions O God, there is none more needy than
me. O God, let not my enemy be glad over me, let not my friend
think bad of me. Don't give trouble in my religion, don't make
my earthly anxiety great and don't entrust me to those who will
not show kindness on me, O Ever living, Eternal.
Inyocation of Khizr: In the name ofGod, with the will of God,
there is no might and strength except in God and what He wills!
Every gift is from God what He wills. AIl good is in His hand
what He wills. Nobody but God removes evils.
Invocation of Prophet Adam: O God, Thou knowest my
secret and open matters, so accept my excuse. Thou knowest
my necessities, so accept my invocation. Thou knowest what is
m my mind. So forgive my sins. O God, I seek from Thee faith
giving good news to my mind and true sure faith
till
I know
that nothing may afflict me except what Thou hast recorded
against me and what Thou hast allotted to me, O possessor of
glory and honour.
CHAPTER X
DIVISION OF TIMES FOR ACTIONS
God has made the world subsevient to men not to live in its
elevated places but to gather provision there from sufficient for
their permanent abode, sufficient for rewards of their souls, so
that they may save themselves from deceits and deceptions of the
world. All men are travelling in this world. Their first abode is
cradle and last abode is grave and their real abode is Paradise or
Hell The term of life is noting but the distance of joumey. Its
every year is a station, every month is a furlong, every day is a
mile, every breath is a step. Its religious action is a wealth and its
time
is the root of
its wealth. Its temptations and greeds are
tumbling block in its path, its profit is vision of God in the abode
of peace and its loss is to be distant from Him and to stay in the
lowest depth of Hell being
tied up with chains. He who
is
indifferent to his breaths will be so sorry on the Reurrection Day
that there will be no limit to
it. That is the time for the greatest
dangers and dreadful questions. For that the friends of God give
up the comforts and pleasures of the transient life of the world
and remain engaged day and night in divine services after
division of times, so that they may earn the nearness of God and
live in comforts in the day of the greatest danger.
EXCELLENCE OF DIVINE SERVICE BY
DIVISION OF TIME
Know, O dear readers, that there
is no saIvation without
meeting with God. The only means to meet Him is to face death
being imbued with love for Him. Love is the fruit of constant
remembrance of the Beloved and to work with that end in view.
One can get acquaintance with Him if one thinks constantly of
Hi, His attributes, His wonderful creations and that there is no
existence of any thing apart from His existence.
It does not
become easy if one does not give up the world except what is
necessary for him. Nothing is fulfilled if time is not divided and
divine services are not done according to fixed times. So divide
time in to several divisions. If a man spends more than half of his
time for worldly pursuits, he may be included more towards the
world. Mind feels difficulty in passing half the time in divine
service. Little time is allotted to divine services. If anyone wishes

250
ZIKR AND INYOCATION
Vol-I
to enter paradise without rendering any account, let him spend
his whole time in religious actions. If any man wishes to make his
scale heavy with good deeds, let him spend most part of his time
in doing good deeds. God says: You have got great occupations
in day time. So remember your Lord at night and be engaged
with undivided mind towards Him. God says: Remember your
Lord morning and evening and make prostration to Him in a
portion of the night and glori fy Him long at night. God says:
Glorify your Lord before sun-rise and before sun-set and glorify
Him after prostration at night
. God says: Praise your Lord when
you stand up and read his Tasbih at the setting of the star at night.
God says: Waking at night is the firmest foot step and fruitful in
invocation. God says: Glorify Him in some portions of night and
some portions of day, so that you may find consolation. God
says: Establish prayer at two ends of the day and a portion of
night. Surely good deeds remove evils.
God says: Or that man who expresses obedience by
prostrating during the whole night and saying prayer who fears
the next world and hopes for the mercy of his Lord. Say: Are
those who are wise equal to the ignorant? God says: Their sides
turn over their beds and they call their Lord in hope and fear.
God says: They sleep very little at night and seek forgiveness at
the latter part of night. God says: Don't drive away those who
call their Lord for His pleasure atdawn and at dusk.
The above verses make it clear to you that the easy way of
getting God is to engage yourself in thoughts of God and to do all
actions regularly after division of time. For
this reason,
the
Prophet said: Those who look at the sun, moon and shade to
remember God are dear to God. God says: The sun and the moon
go on according to a measure. God says: Have you not looked
towards your Lord how He extends the shade? If He wished, He
would have made it stationary and made the sun proof therein.
Then
I draw
it easily towards Myself. God says:
It is He who
made the stars for you, that they may show paths in the darkness
of seas and lands. So think that movements are not only for the
worldly actions but also to ascertain the measure of time by their
help and to do business of the next world by dividing time The
following verse
is
its proof: He created the day and night
alternately for one who wishes to remember Him or wishes to
express gratefulness. This means that what the day makes
Vol-I
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
251
towards loss is compensated by the night. There is no other thing
between Zikr and gratefulness. God says: I have created day and
night as two signs. I make the sign of day clear by removing the
sign of night, so that the people may see clearly, so that you may
seek grace from your Lord and may count year.
NUMBER OF DIVISIONS OF TIME
There are seven divisions of day-(l) one division from early
morning up to sun-rise, (2) two divisions from sun-rise to mid
day, (3) two divisions from the declining of the sun to afternoon,
(4) two divisions from afternoon to sunset. Night has got five
divisions two divisions from sun-set up to going to bed and three
divisions from mid-night to dawn. Now I shall narrate the divine
service during these divisions of day and night.
FIRST DIVISION: This covers the period from the morning
twi-light up to sun-rise. This is the honoured time as God says: By
oath of early dawn when it gives out breath. Praising this time,
God says: Say, I take refuge to the Lord of early dawn. His power
has been manifested by suppression of shade at this time as God
says: Then I take it to Me easily. There is hint of reciting Tasbih at
this time in this verse: When there is dusk and when there is
dawn, proclaim the glory and purity of God. God says: Glorify
your Lord with His praise before sun-rise and before sun set. God
says: Remember the name of your Lord moming and evening.
RULES OF THIS TIME: After getting up from bed,
remember God by saying: All praise is due to God who gave me
life after He made me dead and to Him is the return. Then make
ablution with cleansing teeth and pray two rak'ats of prayer in
your house and then go to the mosque and pray two rak'ats of
compulsory prayer. You should not miss morning and night
prayers in congregation as there are good rewards therefore. The
Prophet said with regard to the moming prayer: If a man goes to
the mosque for prayer after ablution, one reward is written for
each step he takes and one sin
is forgiven. This reward
is
increased to ten fold. When he finishes the prayer at the time of
sun-rise, one reward is written for his every hair of his body-and
the reward of one accepted Haj is given to him. If he sits waiting
for the forenoon prayer, one lac rewards are written for him for
each rak'at. At the end of prayer, keep seated
till sun-rise with
Zikr of God. The Prophet said: If a man keeps seated till sun-rise

252
ZIKR AND INYOCAHON
VoI-I
after mornmg prayer and remains busy in Zikr, it is dear to me
lul
1
t
i
he "ianumission of four slaves. Hazrat Hasan Basari said
S
at the Pr°Phet had said: God said: O children of Adam, make
My Zikr for one hour after moming prayer and for one hour after
afternoon prayer. What is acquired in between these hours will
be sufficient for you. There are four kinds of recitaHons upto sun
rise-(l) Doa and Zikr, (2) Tasbih, (3) Quran reading and
(4) to
ponder over the creations of God.
x . ^
ZIKR: When you finish your prayer, make
Monazatby saying: O God, send blessings on Muhammad and the
femily of Muhammad and also Salam.OGod, Thou art peace, from
Thee peace and to Thee peace retums.O our Lord, make us live with
peace and admit us in the
abode of peace. Thou art blessed, O
pos^ssor of dignity and honour. Then recite the following which
the Prophet used to recite: Glory be to My Lord, the Highest, the
Bestower of g,fts There is no deity but God, the single, He has got
o partner. Kmgdom is His and all praise is His. He gives life and
takes it.. He is ever-living, He has no death, all good is in His hands
ana He is powerful over everything.
(2)
TASBIH:
II is a collection of some formulas and each
rormula should be repeated from thrce times to one hundred
times. The more you recite them, the more efficacious they are
These tormulas are generally ten. (a) There is no deity but God
r
C
r-
a^
h°ned abT
e ’ (b) Glory h® to God and al ' praise is due
TG
h
d
; ™ore 15 "° de"y but God - God
’s greatest. There is no
might and strength except m God, the Grea t, the Mighty. (c) He is
glonous, pure O our Lord and the Lord of angels and Ruh. (d)
Glory be
to God, the great and
all praise
is His.
(e)
I seek
iS
6--'0 God
' fhe Great' there
no deity but He, the Ever
ving, the Ever subsistmg, I seek return to Him. (f) O God there
is none to reject what Thou bestoweth and non to give what Thou
doth reject and no man of honour can give benefit and benefit
comes form Thee alone.
(g) There
is no deity but God
the
NmWnlmlh
6 °Peu Truth ' (h>
1 be8in m
the name of God.
Nothing m the world and heaven can do harm if His name is
remembered and He
is Hearing, Knowing.
(i) O God
send
blessing. on Muhammad, Thy senrant and Prophet and A^ostle
the "literate Prophet. (i) I seek refuge to God, the Hearing, the
Knowtng from the accursed devil. O Lord, I seek refuge from the
machmations of thedevil.
6
Vol-I
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
253
(3) QURAN READING: If you wish to get the rewards of
Zikr, Doa and Quran reading together, read before the sun rise
and sun set the Doa which Khizr
taught Ibrahim Taimi called
"Musabbhatul Arsh" which is as follows.
(1) Read each seven Hmes-Fateha, Nas, Falaq, Ikhlas, Kaferun
and Ayatul Qursi, and then (2) recite seven Hmes 'Glory be to
God,
all praise
is His, there is no deity but God and God
is
greatest' (3) Then send blessings on the Prophet seven Hmes and
(4)
then seek forgiveness seven Hmes for yourself,
for your
parents and for the male and female believers and (5) then utter
seven times the Doa as prescribed. Don't give it up any time
before sun rise and sun set.
Ibrahim Taimi saw in
dream the Prophet and asked him
about the Doa that Khizr had dictated to him and the Prophet
said: It is true. Khizr has spoken the truth. What Khizr says is
true. He knows the dwellers of the world and he is the best of
Abdals. He is one of the soldiers of God in the world. If a hian
recites it, among other rewards, God will forgive him and will
lift His anger from him and order the angel in his left side not to
write his sins for one year. None observes it except one who has
been made fortunate by God and none forsakes it except one who
has been made untortunate by Him.
(4) GOOD THOUGHTS. (a) Think of your past sins and try
to remove them. Remove the obstacles to good deeds and think
of doing good for yourself and general Muslims. (b) Think of
profitable things in the spiritual world and that of the gifts of
God, open and
secret. Think of the God's rewards and
punishments. This pondering
is the best divine service as
it
contains the remembrance of God and two sincere things. (1) The
first thing
is‘ the acquisition of knowledge about God as
contemplation is the key to the eaming of spiritual light. (2) The
second thing is the increase of God's love, as love does not grow
unless there is firm honour for Him in heart. Glory of God is not
opened
to the mind unless one
is acquainted with God's
attributes and His wonderful creations. The fruit of meditaHon is
acquaintance or Ma'arfat. Honour grows from acquaintance and
Iove grows from honour and deep attachment grows from love.
There is difference between Abed and Aref. The former is like
one who hears about a thing and the latter is like one who sees
that thing with his eyes. Aref sees God's glory with the inner light

254
ZIKR AND INYOCATION
Vol-I
of his mind and
Abed sees it with the outer light of his eyes.
There is no Iimit to the inner light of mind, but there is limit to the
external eye sight. The Prophet said: God has got seyenty
screens. If He had disclosed them, the brilliance of God's face
would have destroyed what one could have seen. These screens
are one aboye another and the brilliance of their lights has got
degrees just hke the difference of the lights of the stars, moon and
(2 ^ T
^! ® Second division of day begins from sun-rise to a little
before mid-day. There are two duties therein. One duty is
to
observe Ishraq and Zoha prayers ad another duty is to do
all
actions m connection with the people and for their good. It is
k
.
t0'V™y Ishrac
* of two rak
'ats Jus t atter sun-rise and 4, 6, or 8
rak ats Zoha prayer when the sun-rises very high and before
noon. God says: Oath of Zoha and darkness of night. Regarding
the second duty
it is to visit patients, to join funeral prayer, to do
good works' to be present m the assemblies of the learned and to
do good to the Muslims.
(3) The Third division of day begins just before noon and
declming of the sun. There is order for prayer after every three
hours. There is a prayer after sun-rise. Atter three hours!7here“
the prayer of Zoha and next after three hours, there is the prayer
ifU '
'J and next after three hours, there is Asr prayer and next
after three hours there is Magrib prayer. In the mean time one
can do worldly business.
'
f
.
(3> T^
C Fourth division °f day begins from the declining of
fo!r rl^ f
er
c
n°°n 3nd ends after Zuhr Prayer- Before Zuhr, pray
four rak ats Sunnat prayer. Make it long and this is the time of
acceptance of mvocation. After Zuhr prayer, pray two rak'ats
Sunnat and then 2 or 4 rak'ats Nafl.
^
(5)
Jn
e
*
Fifth division of day begins from the end of Zuhr
for the n
f
Sr °r a
(ternoon ' There is a great reward for waiting
hahh nf m
eomPulsory Prayer after finishing one. This was thf
abit of the former sages. A certain wise man said: Three thines
are no, dear ,o God. (1 ) ,o laugh without any wonderful thing. (!
wakefuT a7nilhlT' T
f° sleCP at daT without hei"g
Wahe
.
at n,ght - To sleep for 8 hours during 24 hours
is
sufficient. Thus one third of life is lost in sleep.
Vol-I
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
255
(6) The Sixth division of day begins from Asr prayer.
Perform four rak
7ats of Sunnat prayer before Azan and Aqamat
and then pray four rak'ats of compulsory prayer.
It is a most
.
opportune time. There is no prayer after Asr.
(7) The Seventh division of day begins when the sun
is
covered with dust and snow and is the time immediately before
sun-set. God says: When it is dusk and dawn, glorify Him. God
says: GIorify Him at two extremes of the day. God says: Seek
forgiveness for your sins and proclaim the purity of your Lord
with praise at dawn and at dusk.
FIVE DIVISIONS OF NIGHT
(1) The First division of night. When the sun
sets, pray
Magrib and remain busy in Zikr between two prayers. The end of
this division is up to the setting of red hue in th western sky. God
has taken oath of this time: Nay, I swear by the night fall. The
excellence of prayer at this time is like that of night prayer as it is
the first stage of night. God says: Glorify God in one portions of
night. This is the prayer of Awabin. The object of the following
verse is this: 'Their sides roll in
their beds". When asked about
this verse the Prophet said: It
is the prayer between Magrib and
Isha as it removes the sins of useless talks of day time and makes
its end good. Pray two rak'ats after Magrib. Then pray four long
prayers and then continue prayer till the setting of the red hues in
the western horizon.
(2) The second divisions of nightbegins from the early time
of Isha up to the sleep of the people. God says: I swear by night
and what it brings (darkness). He said: Up to the darkness of the
night' Pray four rak'ats before compulsory prayer and two rakats
after it and then four rak'ats, after that 13 rak'ats and then Bitr
prayer. This may be done at the earlier portion of night or latter
portion. The Prophet said: There is half reward in saying prayer
sitting than standing and half reward in saying prayer lying than
sitting.
(3) The third division of night
is in sleep. Sleep
is
considered as Ibadat if certain rules are observed. The Prophet
said: When a man goes to bed after making Zikr with ablution, he
is rewarded as in a state of prayer
till he wakes up. An angel
enters his dress. If he moves during sleep and makes Zikr, the

256
ZIKR AND INYOCATION
VoI-I
angel invokes for him and seeks God's forgiveness for him. The
Prophet said: When a man sleeps with ablution, his soul is taken
up
to the Throne. This happens in
all cases. How then
is
it
regarding special persons and sages? Secrets are disclosed
to
them during sleep. For this Reason, the Prophet said: The divine
seryices of the learned and
their breaths are Tasbih. Hazrat
Mu az said:
I sleep and then pray and what I do in my sleep, I
think
I do
it in my wakeful state. This was mentioned to
the
Prophet who said: Mu'az has got good knowledge of religion.
THERE ARE TEN RULES OF SLEEP
(1) Teeth cleansing and ablution. The Prophet said: When a
man sleeps with ablution, his soul is hung up with the Throne
and his dream becomes true If he sleeps without ablution, his
soul cannot reach there and he cannotsee dreams which are true.
(2) Keep tooth stick and ablution water near the head so that
you may stand for prayer when awake. The Prophet used
to
cleanseteeth may times at night specially when he awoke from
sleep. The Prophet said: If a man goes to bed with this intention
that he would pray at night and his two eyes prevail upon him nd
he sleeps till dawn, whatever he intended is written for him and
his sleep is a gift from God as it were.
(3) Sleep at night keeping a written wasiat near your head as
it is no wonder to meet with death during sleep. If a man dies
without wasiat, he will not be Permitted
to talk in grave
till
Resurrection Day. The dead persons will come to meet him and
question him but he will notbe able to talk.
(4) Sleep with sound mind after making Taubah for all sins
and seek forgi veness for all Muslims. Don
r
t polluteyour mind by
oppressing any man and don't be firm in committing sin after
wakmg. The Prophet said: If a man goes to bed with the intention
ot domg no oppression, hatred and envy, his sins are forgiven.
(5) Don't sleep in soft bed and your bed should be of middle
kmd. There was nothing between the bodies of Ahle Suffa and
earth. They used to say: Our bodies have been made of earth and
shall ha ve to return to earth.
(6) Don't sleep till it overtakes you. The sleep of Ahle Suffah
was strong, food little and talk necessary. For this reason, it is
t
Vol-I
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
257
said that they slept
little at night even though
it prevailed .upon-
them. The Prophet said: Don't take too much trouble at night. The
Prophet was asked: A certain person prays at night. Wheh sleep
;
prevails over him, he keeps himself hanging
with a rope. The».
Prophet prohibited him from that. He said: When it becomes easy to
you at night, pray. When sleep becomes strong, sleep. The Prophet
said: Strive hard in actions as God does not inflict trouble over you
.
, until you inflict trouble on yourself. The Prophet said: He who does
Veligious actions easily is best of you The Prophet said: I pray and
sleep, keep fast and break. This is my way. He who does not foilow
my ways in not of me The Prophet said: Don't take too much trouble
for religion as
it is firm. He who wishes to stick to it firmly, it will
overcome him. Don't make divine service a burden on you.
(7) Sleep facing the Ka'ba. It is like keeping a dead body in grave
keeping the face towards the Ka'ba.
(8) Invoke at the time of sleep and say: O Lord. I keep mv side in
Thy name and shall raise it up in Thy name-up to the end. Recite special
’verses of the Quran, such as
Ayatul Qursi, the last portion of Suran Badr, Sura A'raf, Falaq and
Nas and 25 times of the following formula Sobhan Allah walhamdo
lillah wala Ilaha Illallah and Allaho Akbar.
(9) Remember God at the time of sleep. Sleep is a kind of death and
rising is a kind of Resurrection. God says: God takes souls at the time of
their death and the souls of those who do not die in their sleep. God
says: He it is who causes you to die at night/ As a man who is awake
sees things which he does not see in sleep, so also a sleeping man sees
things which his mind cannot conceive in wakeful state. Sleep is the
period between life and death as Barzakh is the period between this
world and the next world. Loqman asked his son: O dear son, if you
doubt about death, don't sleep. As you sleep, so you will die. If you
doubt about resurrection, don't be awake. As you wake up after sleep,
so you will wake up after your death. Hazrat Ayesha said: When the
Prophet went to bed, he used to place his head upon his right hand,
think himself dead and say: O God, Lord of seven heavens and Lord of
the great Throne. O our Lord and the Lord of all things and their owner.
(10) Doa after waking up. When the Prophet woke up form sleep,
he used to recite the following: There is no. delty but God, the Single,
the Almighty, Lord of heavens and earth and what is therein, the
Mighty. the Forgiving". After rising, always remember God. That is the
sign of love. When you stand up after rising from sleep, recite: All
praise is forGod who has given us life after He has made us dead and to
Him is the Resurrection.

258
ZIKR AND INYOCATION
Vol-I
(4) Pourth division o£ night begins from mid night and ends with
the end of night except one sixth of it remaining. At this timer a man
rises to pray Tahajjud. God says: I swear by the nieht when it is deep.
The Prophet was asked: Which time of the night is tne appropriate time
for exception of invocation? He said: Mid-night Prophet David said: O
Lord, I love to do your service, but what time is most opportune? God
revealed to him: O David, don't be awake in the early or latter part of
the night as he who does not sleep in its early part sleeps at its latter
part. If one keeps awake at the latter part of the nigh he cannot remain
awake at its early
part, Keep awake in its middle portion, keep alone
with Me at that time and I also will remain alone witn you and will raise
up your necessities The Prophet was asked: What portion of night is
best? He said: The middle ot the latter half of night. During this time,
pray by two rak'ats. The Prophet used to pray at least 13 rak'ats at this
including Bitr prayer. There are prescribed invocations to be recited
therein.
(5) Fifth division of night. The remaining portion of night is Sehri
time. God
says: Seek forgiveness at Sehri time. This
is the time of
departure of angels of nignt and the arri val of the angels of day. When
there is dawn, tnere is the end of this division and the beginning of the
divisions of the day. The Prophet said:
If a man fasts, gives charity,
visits the sick and attends mneral service every day, his sins are
forgi ven. In another narration, he enters Paradise. The companions did
not miss a day without charity even though it be w ith a date or a piece
of bread: as the Prophet said: A man remains under the shadow of his
charity till he faces judgment. TheProphetsaid: Saveyourself from Hell
by giving in charity even a portion of date. The Prophet said: If a man
rises at aawn, there is the duty of charity upon every vein of his body.
He has got 360 veins. Your enjoining good
is an act of charity, your
forbidding evil is ari act of charity, your helping a weak man in bearing
his load
is an act of charity, your showing path to man is an act of
charity, your removing nuisance from the patnway is an act of charity.
Even he named Tasbih and Tahlil as acts of charity. Then he said: Two
rak'ats of prayer before noon takeaway ail rewards.
DIVISIONS OF TIME ACCORDING
TO CIRCUMSTANCES
(1)
A WORSHIPER is one who has got no business except divine
service.
If he gives up di vine service, he sits without occupation. Some
of the companions used
to
recite Tasbih
1200 times aaily,
some
30,000times, some prayed from 300 to 600 rka'ts. Others prayed at least
100 rak'ats a day and a night. Some finished the Quran once a day, some
twice a day. Karrah-b- Bashrah used to make Tawaf of the Ka'ba 70
times at day time and 70 times at night. Inspite of that, they finished the
Quran twice every day and night. The saint Ibrahim-b-Adham said as
reported from an angel that he who recites the foIIowing will not die till
he sees his place in Paradise: Glory be to the Highest Judge. Glory be to
the strict Law-giver. Glory be to One who effaces the night and brings
the day. glory be to One whom no affair can keep busy. Glory be to God,
the Merciful, the Begining.
Vol-I
259
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
(2) A LEARNED MAN is he whose learning benefits the people,
such as giving legal decisions, teaching, writing religions books. His
division of time is not like those of an
Abed
or worshiper, as his
reading and writing books are necessary and
i
1 requires a greatdeal of
time. Tne excellence of learning and teaching proves it. The learning
which we speak of and which is above divine service is that learning
which creates a desire for the Hereafter, distaste of this world or such a
leaming which helps joumey towards the next world and not that
learning which helps increase of wealth and properties. He should be
busy up to sun- rise in Zikr and invocations ana after sun-rise up to
noon in teaching and leaming, and from noon to Asr in reading and
writing books and from Asr
to sunset
in Hadis, Tafsir and other
benefiting subjects.
(3) STUDENTS: The Prophet said: To be present in an assembly of
Zikr
is better than prayers of one thousand rak'ats, attending one
thousand funerals and visiting one thousand patients. The Prophet
said: When you see a garden of Paradise, roam in
it. He askea: O
Prophet of God, what is the garden of Paradise? He said: Assembly of
Zikr. So a student should not tum away from such an assembly. When a
man complained to Hasan Basari above the hardness of his heart, he
said to him: Attend the assembles of Zikr.
(4) BUSINESS MAN: He who is required to do business for all
times to maintain his family members, should do it without engaging
himself in divine service for all times with this condition that he must
remember God in all his dealings and not forget Him and perform
compulsory divine services.
(5) AN ADMINISTRATOR is like a leader. Similar is the case of a
judge, or a mutawalli or a person on whom the affairs the Muslims have
oeen entrusted. They should remember how the rightly guided Caliphs
conducted themselves with heavy duties on their snoulaers.
(6) UNITARIAN: He is one who is engaged in the meditation of
God, does not love anybody except God ana does not fear anybody
except Him. Hedoes notacceptprovision except from Him. Such a man
neea not observe the di visions of time but should keep company witty
God soon after the compulsory prayers with humility of mind. In other
words there is lesson for him m wnatever thoughts occur in his mind,
whatever sound falls in his ears and whatever things fall in his eyes.
Such a man flees towards God as God says: So flee away to God. The
support of the above version is found also in the following verse: when
you put them alone and they do not worship except God, they take
shelter to a cave and your Lord will provide them with space out of His
mercy. There is another verses:
I am going towards my Lord and He
will soon guide me'. This is the rank of a Siddiq.
SECTION 2
EXCELLENCE OF NIGHT WORSHIP
The Prophet said: Sun-set prayer is best to God.
It has not been
reduced for a tra veller. It opens night prayers and ends day prayers. If a

ZIKR AND INYOCATION
Vol-I
260
mari prays two rak'ats Magrib prayers, two buildings will be built for
him in Paradise. The distance of the two buildings is the path of one
huridred years. In between them, there are trees which are sufficient for
the inmates of the world to see after roaming. The Prophet said: If a man
says ten rak'ats of prayer between Magrigb and Isha, there will be
building for him in Paradise. Hazrat Omar asked: O Prophet of God,
.our buildings then would be numerous. He said: God has got much
more and
better. The Prophet
said:
If a man prays Magrib
in
congregation and two rak'ats in addition without talking any worldly
thirigs m between them and reads chapter Faitha and then versesfrom
the tirst portion of chapter Baqr and two verses from its middle, chapter
Ikhlas 15 times and then makes Ruku and prostration and when he
stands for the second rak'at and recites chapter Fatiha, Ayatul Kursi
and three verse of chapter Baqr, and chapter Ikhlas.
15 times, his
rewards will be unlimited according to a tradition.
Once Obaidullah was asked: Did the Prophet pray except the
compulsory prayers? He replied: He prayed between Magrib and Isha,
that is the prayer of Awabin. Hazrat Anas and Ibn Masud used to pray
them always. The sage Abu Sloaiman Darani said that to pray this
Awabin prayer isbetter than optional fast.
EXCELLENCE OF NIGHT PRAYER
QURAN: God says: Your Lord knows that you stand up in prayer
for two thirds of the night. God says: Divine service at night is the firm
footstep and fruitful for invocations. God says: He who says prayer
standing and with prostration throughout the night and fears the next
world, etc.Godsays: Those who pass the night for their Lord prostraing
and standing in prayer, etc. God says: Seek help with patience and
prayer.
.
HADIS: Thee Prophet said: When one of you sleeps, the devil
knots three ties by his side and says to each tie: You have got a greater
portion of night arid so sleep. If he awakes and makes Zikr of God, one
tie is uriloosened. If he prays, anothef»tie is unloosened. Then he rises
up with pleasure or with displeasure. Mention was once made to the
Prophet of a man who sleeps all the night and he said: The devil has
passed urine in his ears. The Prophet said: If a man prays two rak'ats in
mid night, it is better for him than the world and what i t contains. Had it
not beeh difficult for my fol!owers, I would have made it compulsory
for tKem. The Prophet said: There is a time at night which nobody
shriuld miss. If he prays at that time, God accepts it. This happens in ail
nights. Mugirah-b-Shubah narrated that the Prophet used to stand so
long in prayer that his feet became swollen. He was asked: What is it?
•God has forgiven all your past and future sins. He said: Shall I not be a
grateful servant?
This shows that the additional worship is for additional rank as
gratefulness brings additional rewards. God says: If you are grateful, I
will given you additional rewards. The Prophet said: O Abu Hurairah,
if you wish to get the mercy of God while you are alive and while you
are dead in grave, get up at night and pray and*seek the pleasure ofGod.
Vol-I
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
261
O Abu Hurairah, pray in a corner of your house. As the d wellers of the
earth see the brightness of the stars, so the inmates of heaven see the
light of your house. The Prophet said: You should pray at night as it was
the habit of your earlier sages. Prayer at night brings one near God, his
sins are forgiven, diseases of body are cured and faults are prevented.
The Prophet said: If a man prays at night though being prevailed upon
by sleep, the rewards of prayers are also written for him. Sleep is an act
of charity for him. The Prophet said to Abu Zarr: Don't you take
luggage for your ioumey? He said: Yes He said: Why don't you take
properties for the Resurrection Day? O Abu Zarr, shall I not inform you
what will benefit you? He said: Yes, my parentsbe sacrificed to thee. He
said: Fast in summer for resurrection and pray two rak'ats in the
darkness of night for loneliness in grave, make pilgrimage for great
works and give charity to thee poor.
It has been narrated that there was a man at the time of the Prophet
who used to stand in prayer when the people remained asleep and recite
theQuran and say : O Lord of Hell, saveme trom it. When it was mentioned
to the Prophet, he said: Call me when he prays. He came and heard him
saying that. When it wasdawn,he said to him:O man why don't you pray
for Paradise? He said: O Prophet of God, I can't reacli mere as my actions
havenotreached thatstaga Then Gebriel camedownand said: Inform him
that God has saved him rrom Hell and admitted him in Paradise. Gebriel
said to the Prophet How good Ibn Omar would have been if he would
have prayed at night? The Prophet informed him of it. Afterwards he used
to pray at night. Hazrat Joynal Abedin said: OnceHazratIhya atebread of
wheat to his satisfaction and slept up to moming. God then revealed to
him: O Ihya, you have considered your house better than My house, your
neighbour better than My neighbours. O Ihya, by My glory and honour, if
you peep at the garden of paradise, your fat will be swollen to get it and
your >oul will proceed rorward. If you look once to Hell, your fat will melt
and you will shed blood after tears and you will getnew skin after your old
skinhasmelted.
The Prophet was asked: a certain man prays at night but commits
theft at dawn. He said: He will not do what he does. Tne Prophet said;
May God show mercy on him who rises up at night and prays, then
wakes his wife from sleep and she also prays. If she refuses, he throws
water on her face. The Prophet said: May God show mercy on the
woman who rises up at night and prays and then wakes up her
husband and he also prays. If he refuses, she throws water on his face.
The Prophet said: If a man rises up at night and awakes his wife and
both pray two rak'ats of prayers, both we regarded as remeirbering
ones. The Prophet said: After compulsory prayer, the best p. jyer is
prayer at night. The Prophet said: If a man sleeps in his appointed time
or in any portion of it and makes divine service between Fajr and Zuhr,
he worsnips as it were the whole night.
Wise Saying: Once Hazrat Omar
fell down a.Ter reciting some
verses at night and he was looked after for many days as patient is
looked after. When the people went to sleep, Ibn MTasua used to rise up
and his voice used to be heard up to moming like the humming of bees.
Sufiyan Saori ate one night witn satisfaction and said: When an ass is

262
ZIKR AND INVOCATION
Vol-I
given good grass, itsactions also become good. He prayed up todawn.
Hazrat Hasan Basari said: I don' t know whether it is better to spend this
property in charity than to keep awake at night. He was asked: Why do
the Faces of those who pray Tahajjud become brighter than those of
others? He said: Because they stay with the Merciful in loneliness and
get ught from His light.
HazratFuzail said: If you cannot keep awake at nightand keep fast
at day time, know that you have been depri ved of good and that your
sins have become great. Rubi said: I spent many nights in the house of
lmamShafeyi. He used to sleep very little at night. Abu Zuairiya said:
stayed once at the house of Abu Hunifa for six months. He never kept
his side on his bed for one single night. At first he used to keep awoke
for half the night. While passing once by a people, he heard them say:
This man keeps awake the whole night. He said.
I don't do
it
he Hsed
t0 keeP awa^e the whole night. The saee
Malek-b-Dinar said: One night I forgot my duty and began to sleep
I
tound in dream a beautiful young girl with a letter in her hand sayine to
me: Can you read this letter? I said Yes. She handed over to me the letter
which contained:-
What! joy and hope have destroyed you!
Has your mind forgot the hope of Hurs?
You will stay in paradise witnoutdeath.
You will make enjoymentthen with Hurs.
So rise up from sleep, i t is best for you.
Reciting Quran in Tahajjud is better than sleep.
Mosruq once started on pilgrimage and spent the whole night in
prostration.
It is narrated that Wahab-b-Munabbah did not place his
side on bed for thirty years. Solaiman Taimi prayed Fajar for 40 years
I
CAUSES OF MAKING NIGHT-WAKING EASY
Know, O dear readers, thatnight wakingis difficult for many persons
but it is easy for one who has got by GocTs rnercy the secret and open
conditions of night-waking. The open conditions are four-(I) Not to eat and
drink much It begets sleep and there is trouble in prayers. A certain Sufi
used to advise his disciples: O congregation of disciples, don't eat much,
don't drink much. If you do
it, it will increase your sleep and you will
repent much at the time ofyour death. To reduce stomach from the burden
of food is good. (2) Not to make too much labour at day time, as too much
labour brings too much sleep. (3) Not to give up a little sleep at day time as
lt is sunnat tor night waking (4) Not to commit sins at day, as it makes the
heart hard and creates barrier to get mercy of God. Sufiyan Saori said: On
account of one sin, I have been deprived of prayer at night for fi ve months.
He wasquestioned: What is thatsin? Hesaid: I said in my mind on seeinga
man weeping: This he is doing for show of people.
SECRET CONDITIONS OF NIGHT WAKING
(1)
To keep the mind
safe from hatred
of the Muslims, from
mnovations and
the sorrowful thoughts of the world,
If a man
is
Vol-I
THE BOOK OF WORSHIP
263
engaged in worldly pursuits, it does not become easy for him to pray at
night. If he stands in prayer, thoughts of his worldly actions come in his
mind.
(2) to keep fear of God strong in mind and to lessen hope. When a
man thinks ot Hell and of the next world, his sleep goes away and fear
comes in his mind.
(3) To know the excellence of night prayer and to hope for th&k
(4) Love for God and strength of faith greatly entourage night-
w
fakefulness, as night prayer is nothing but to nold secret talk wi th God.
He knows the condition of mind and sees whatever faults the mind has
f
;ot. Forviveness is to be sought for these faults to God. When there is
ove for God, you
will love loneliness without doubt and taste in
monazat. This taste will give you encouragement to wake up at night.
This taste should notberemoved as wisdom and wisesayings testify it.
The sage Fuzail- b-yeaz said: When the sun sets in,
I become glad in
darknessas I can stay then with my Lord in loneliness. When itrisesup,
I become sorry at the advent of men to me. A certain leamed man said:
"The pleasure which a Sufi gets in Monazat at night can be compared
with that in Paradise.
SIX STAGES OF NIGHT-WAKIN
(1) To keep awake the whole night. This
is the hi^hest rank
belonging only to the strong who are always engaged in divme service,
those who get taste in monazat to Him., This is the food and life of their
souls. For this reason, they fel easy to keep awake for the whole night.
They sleep at day time when the people remain busy in worldly deeds.
This was the practice of some early sages and saints. They used to say
morning prayer with the ablution of Isha prayer. Abu Taleb makki
narratea this from 4o narrators. Among them, there were Sayyed-b-
Musayyeb, Sufyan-b- Solaim, Fuzail-b-Yeaz, Wahab-b-Ward, Taus,
Wahab-b-Monabhah, Rabiy-b-Khasem, Hakam, Abu Solaiman Darani,
Ali-b-Bakar, Abu Abullah, Abu Asem, Abu Zaber Salman,
Malek-b-Dinar, Solaiman Taimi, Eazid Rakkashi, Abu Hazem,
Muhammad-b-Munqad er and others.
(2) To keep awake for half the night. Such men were innumerable.
Their habit was to sleep in the first portion out of three portions of night
and the last portion
out of six portions of night. Their time of prayer
was at mid-night and that is better for i t.
(3) To keep awake for one third of the night. For this, they used to
sleep up to mid night and then in
the one sixth portion of the night.
They liked
to sleep in the latter part of the nignt as the slumber of
morning is removed by that. Hazrat Ayesha said:
I did not see the
Prophetbut in sleep after Sehri time.
(4) To keep awake in one sixth portion of the night. It is the middle
of the later part of the night and before one sixth portion of the night.
(5)
Not to observe any time of night for prayer. Such a man keeps
awake at the first part of the night till sleep prevails over him. When ne
wakes up, he prays. When he again feels tne urge of sleep, he goes to

264
ZIKR AND INYOCATION
Vol-I
bcd. Thus he gets up twice and sleeps twice during the same night. This
is difficult bui better. This was the habit of the Prophet, some great
companions and Tabeyins. The Prophet sometimes kept awake for one
third of the night, sometimes two thirds and sometimes one sixth. God
says: your Lord knows that you stand in prayer nearly two thirds of the
night or half or one third. Hazrat Ayessha said: The Prophet used to get
up on hearing the crowing of cock. This happened in the last portion out
of the six portions of the night.
(6) This is the lowest waking. To keep awake to the measurement
of four or two rak'ats of prayer or
to remain busy
in Zikr and
invocations for one hour. For this he gets the rewards of waking up for
the whole night. The Prophet said: Pray at night even through it is to
the length of the time of milking a goat.
EXCELLENCE OF SPECIAL NIGHTS AND DAYS
To do divine service in the nights which have got excellence is
sunnat. The number of these nights is fifteen. Nobody should neglect
these nights as these are the reasons of good deeds and the best time for
trade in religion. If a man is indifferent at the time of season, he cannot
make profit. These nights are the following. Six odd nights of the last
portion of Ramzan including the Blessed night the night, of 17th
Ramzan in which thebelievers and the infidels met Badr.
The remaining nine nights are as follows: The
first night of
Muharram the night of Ashura, thee first night of Rajab, the 15th night
of Rajab, the 27th night of Rajab as it is the night of Prophet's ascension
to heaven. The Prophet said about this night of mercy: If a man does
good deeds in this night, he gets the reu ards of one hundred years He
who prays 12 rak'ats in this night reading in each Rak'at chapter Fatiha
and one chapter of the Quran Tashahhad once and sends blessings on
the Prophet one hundred times, invokes for himself what he wishes for
him in
this world and the next and gets up at dawn with fast, God
acceptallhisinvocaHons.ThenthereisthemiddlenightofShaban.One
is to pray one hundred rak'ats of prayer and recite Faitha, ten Hmes
Ikhals in each rak'at. Then there are the night of Arafat and the two
nights of two I'ds. The Prophet said: One who wakes up in the nights of
two I'ds, his soul will not die when all souls will die.
There are nineteen days of excellence: The day of Araft, the day of
Ashura, the day of 27th Rajab (If a man fasts on the day, he keeps fast as
it were for sixty months and God sends Gebrief on this day with His
message), the 17th day of Ramzan (the day on which the battle of Badr
was fought), the 15th day of Shaban, the Jumma day, two day of two
I'ds, ten days of Zilhaj and the day of Tashria. The Prophet said: If the
day of Jumma is safe, all the days are safe. If the month of Ramzan is
safe, the whole year is safe.
«« THE END =